<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts and Letters</title>
      <author><name reg="Johns, C. H. W.">C. H. W. Johns</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>May 3, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28674</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-05-03">May 3,  2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made available by
            The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Library of Ancient Inscriptions</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Babylonian And Assyrian</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Laws, Contracts and Letters</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">C. H. W. Johns, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Lecturer in Queens' College, Cambridge, and</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">King's College, London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Charles Scribner's Sons</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1904</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Dedication</head>

<p>
To<lb/>
My Mother<lb/>
In Memory Of Loving Help
</p>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
The social institutions, manners, and customs of an ancient
people must always be of deep interest for all those to
whom nothing is indifferent that is human. But even for
modern thinkers, engrossed in the practical problems of our
advanced civilization, the records of antiquity have a direct
value. We are better able to deal with the complicated
questions of the day if we are acquainted with the simpler
issues of the past. We may not set them aside as too
remote to have any influence upon us. Not long ago men
looked to Greece and Rome for political models. We can
hardly estimate the influence which that following of antiquity
has had upon our own social life.
</p>

<p>
But there is a deeper influence even than Greek politics
and Roman law, still powerfully at work among us, which
we owe to a more remote past. We should probably resent
the idea that we were not dominated by Christian principles.
So far as they are distinct from Greek and Roman
ideals, most of them have their roots in Jewish thought.
When a careful investigation is made, it will probably be
found that the most distinctive Christian principles in our
times are those which were taken over from Jewish life,
since the Old Testament still more widely appeals to us
than the New. But those Jewish ideas regarding society
have been inherited in turn from the far more ancient Babylonian
civilization. It is startling to find how much that
we have thought distinctively our own has really come
down to us from that great people who ruled the land of
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
the two streams. We need not be ashamed of anything
we can trace back so far. It is from no savage ancestors
that it descends to us. It bears the <q>hall mark,</q> not only
of extreme antiquity but of sterling worth.
</p>

<p>
The people, who were so highly educated, so deeply
religious, so humane and intelligent, who developed such
just laws, and such permanent institutions, are not unprofitable
acquaintances. A right-thinking citizen of a modern
city would probably feel more at home in ancient Babylon
than in mediæval Europe. When we have won our way
through the difficulties of the language and the writing to
the real meaning of their purpose and come into touch with
the men who wrote and spoke, we greet brothers. Rarely
in the history of antiquity can we find so much of which we
heartily approve, so little to condemn. The primitive virtues,
which we flatter ourselves that we have retained, are
far more in evidence than those primitive vices which we
know are not extinct among us. The average Babylonian
strikes us as a just, good man, no wild savage, but a law-abiding
citizen, a faithful husband, good father, kind son,
firm friend, industrious trader, or careful man of business.
We know from other sources that he was no contemptible
warrior, no mean architect or engineer. He might be an
excellent artist, modelling in clay, carving rocks, and painting
walls. His engraving of seals was superb. His literary
work was of high order. His scientific attainments were
considerable.
</p>

<p>
When we find so much to approve we may naturally ask
the reason. Some may say it is because right was always
right everywhere. Others will try to trace our inheritance
of thought. At any rate, we may accord our praise to those
who seized so early in the history of the race upon views
which have proved to be of the greatest and most permanent
value. Perhaps nowhere else than in the archives of
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
the old Assyrian and Babylonian temples could we find
such an instructive exhibition of the development of the
art of expressing facts and ideas in written language. The
historical inscriptions, indeed, exhibit a variety of incidents,
but have a painful monotony of subject and a conventional
grandeur of style. In the contracts we find men struggling
for exactness of statement and clearness of diction. In the
letters we have untrammelled directness of address, without
regard to models of expression. In the one case we have a
scrupulous following of precedent, in the other freedom
from rule or custom. One result is that while we are
nearly always sure what the contract said and intended, we
often are completely unable to see why the given phrases
were used for their particular purpose. Every phrase is
technical and legal, to a degree that often defies translation.
On the other hand, the letters are often as colloquial in
style as the contracts are formal. Hence they swarm with
words and phrases for which no parallel can be found.
Unless the purpose of the letter is otherwise clear, these
words and phrases may be quite unintelligible. Any side
issue may be introduced, or even a totally irrelevant topic.
While the point of these disconnected sentences may have
been perfectly clear to the recipient of the message, we cannot
possibly understand them, unless we have an intimate
acquaintance with the private life and personal relations of
the two correspondents.
</p>

<p>
Hence, quite apart from the difficulties of copying such
ancient inscriptions, often defaced, originally ill-written,
and complicated by the personal tastes of individual scribes
for odd spellings, rare words, or stock phrases; besides the
difficulties of a grammar and vocabulary only partly made
out; the very nature of both contracts and letters implies
special obscurities. But the peculiarities of these obscurities
are such as to excite curiosity and stimulate research.
</p>

<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>

<p>
The wholesome character of the subject-matter, the absence
of all possibility of a revision in party interests, the probable
straightforward honesty of the purpose, act like a tonic
to the ordinary student of history. Nowhere can he find
more reliable material for his purpose, if only he can understand
it. The history he may reconstruct will be that of
real men, whose character and circumstances have not yet
been misrepresented. He will find the human nature singularly
like what he may observe about him, once he has
seen through superficial manners and customs.
</p>

<p>
One important point cannot be too strongly insisted upon.
Numerous as our documents are, they do not form a continuous
series. One collection is chiefly composed of temple
archives, another comes from a family deed-chest, where
only such documents were preserved as were of value to the
persons who collected them. At one period we may have a
great number of documents relating to one sort of transaction.
In the next period we may have hardly any reference
to similar transactions, but very complete evidence regarding
other matters. We may assume that, in such a conservative
country as Assyria or Babylonia, things went on for
ages in much the same way. Conclusions rightly drawn for
early times are probably true for the later periods also. As
far as we can test this assumption, it holds good. We may
even assume that the converse is true, but that is more
doubtful.
</p>

<p>
Thus, we find that the practice of taking a pledge as
security for debt is fully established for later times and we
may therefore hesitate to deny its existence in early periods,
although we have no direct evidence on the point. This
absence of evidence may be due to the nature of the early
collections. It may be an accident. It may also be due to
the fact that the tablet acknowledging a loan was usually
broken up on the return of the sum. But it might also be
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
the fact that pledges were not usual in early times. Such
was, indeed, formerly the conclusion drawn from the absence
of documents referring to pledges; but Dr. B. Meissner
pointed out that the legal phrase-books bore witness
to the existence of the custom. The discovery of the Code
of Ḥammurabi has shown that the practice not only existed,
but was regulated by statute in his time. Hence the argument
from silence is once more shown to be fallacious.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it is well to avoid a dogmatic statement
of the existence of a practice before the date at which
we have direct evidence of it: thus, it has been stated that
the tithe was paid in Babylonia <q>from time immemorial.</q>
The only direct evidence comes from the time of Nebuchadrezzar
II. and later. In view of such an early antiquity
as that, the use of the phrase <q>time immemorial</q> was perhaps
once justified. But we are now equipped with documentary
evidence concerning customs two or three thousand
years earlier. Until we can discover some direct evidence
there of tithe, we must content ourselves with saying that it
was regularly paid under the Second Empire of Babylonia.
We may be firmly convinced that a custom so widespread
did not spring into being all at once. But the tithe may have
been a composition for earlier dues, and as such may have
been introduced from Chaldea by Nabopolassar. It may
therefore not have been of native Babylonian growth.
</p>

<p>
In this and many similar cases it is well not to go beyond
the evidence.
</p>

<p>
To some extent the plan of this work must necessarily be
different from that of the rest of the series. When a historical
inscription is once well translated its chief bearings
can be made out and it is its own interpreter to a large extent.
But the object in a contract is to legally bind certain
parties to a course of action, and there its translation ends.
We do not find much interest now in the obligations of these
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
parties, save in so far as they illustrate the progress of civilization.
It is the conclusion we are to draw which gives
the interest. When we have reached that, a thousand more
contracts of the same type add nothing to that point. We
may use them to make a study of proper names, or to correct
our notions of chronology by their dates, or to draw up
genealogies, or even to elaborate statistics of occurrences of
particular forms of words, of prices, and the like; or try to
reconstruct the topography of a town; but from the point
of view of a student of law and history, a thousand are
little better than one.
</p>

<p>
As a rule, however, we rarely find a fresh example of an
old type without some small deviation, which is worth recording.
But to translate it, for the sake of that small
difference, would fill a book with examples, so similar as to
be wearisome in their monotony. The only way then is to
select some bold example, translate it as a fair average
specimen, and then collect in an introduction and notes the
most interesting additional items of information to be
gathered from others of the type. Hence most of the types
here selected have involved the reading and study of scores
of texts, though but one is given in translation. Other
points of great interest arise, as for example, the obligations
to public service, which are not the direct subject of
any one text. Hence, no single example can be selected for
translation. The data of many texts must be collected, and
only a sentence here and there can be utilized for translation.
Hence, while other volumes of the series are properly
translations, with brief introductions and a few notes, this
must consist of copious introductions and many notes with
a few translations.
</p>

<p>
Of course, all technical, philological and historical discussions
must be avoided. Those who wish to find further
examples, illustrating the points given, will be referred to
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
the sources and commentaries which give almost endless
repetitions of the same type. As a rule, a fresh example,
which has not been translated before, will be used here. In
some cases, however, where the most typical examples have
already been used, they are reproduced.
</p>

<p>
The more important and new details are substantiated
by references in foot-notes. When several references could
be given, it has been the rule to give only one. For fuller
information the literature of the subject may be consulted.
But where the Assyrian or Babylonian words are given,
the reader will consult the lexicons first. There are many
admirable glossaries attached to the editions of texts, which
for students are a valuable supplement to the lexicons. All
philological discussions are, of course, excluded. As a rule,
doubtful interpretations will be ignored or at least queried.
It is, on the other hand, impossible to give detailed proofs
of what is certain to the writer, when it disagrees with
recognized authorities. Nor is it desirable to puzzle the
reader with alternative views, when there is no opportunity
for him to judge of their merits.
</p>

<p>
Every attempt will be made to discard non-essentials.
Thus, in order to insure that there should be no mistake as
to the persons intended, the ancient scribe usually gave not
only the name, but the father's name, and often added the
name of his tribe, or his occupation. For example, <q>Ardi-Ishtar,
son of Ashur-bânî, the son of Gaḥal,</q> might be the
scribe's careful specification of one party to some transaction.
But unless some other party is a relation and the
transaction explicitly concerns what could take place between
relations, the whole line gives us no information of value
for illustrating the subject for which it is quoted. Indeed,
in most cases, the name itself is of no interest. It is true
that the names have a value of their own; but that is aside
from the purpose of this book. The examples are selected
<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>
to illustrate legal points, not for the sake of the names.
And indeed, the few interesting names so given would be
insufficient to serve any useful purpose; they might even be
misused, for no permanent results can be obtained by picking
up here and there a name, with some fanciful likeness to
Abraham, or Jacob, unless a complete list of similar names
be available to check and control the readings.
</p>

<p>
Hence, as a rule, the name of a party is condensed into
a single letter, chosen usually in order to suggest the part
played by the person in the transaction. Thus S stands for
the seller, B for the buyer, J for the judge, C for the creditor,
L for the lender, D for the debtor or borrower, and so
on. These abbreviations may be used without any detriment
to the argument, as the context usually defines the relation
and there is no need to remember what they mean. This
seems preferable, for the most part, to the Continental system
of using A-A-G for the above name.
</p>

<p>
As a further abbreviation, all lists of witnesses are excluded.
The date is usually suppressed, for, unless we are following
a series of transactions between the same parties, nothing
more than the epoch is of importance. As the material is
arranged by epochs, there can be no question in this regard.
If any evolution of process or any reference to former transactions
is involved, so that the date is important, it is given.
</p>

<p>
A collection of legal documents may be studied in a
variety of ways.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the least productive plan is to ransack them for
illustrations of a theory, or a particular point. When the
theory is already well known, as in the case of Roman or
mediæval law, such a procedure is justifiable, but when the
theory has to be made out, it is wellnigh inexcusable.
Some valuable monographs have followed this method, but
they can hardly expect to give permanent results. For
comparative purposes our material is so new, and so little
<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>
worked, that it is sheer waste of time to seek for parallels
elsewhere until everything is clearly made out to which
parallels are to be sought. The whole bulk of material
must be read through and classified. Until this is done,
some important point may easily be overlooked.
</p>

<p>
The first attempts at classification will be provisional. A
certain amount of overlapping is sure to occur. For example,
slave sales obviously form a provisional group. But
slaves were sold along with lands or houses. Shall these
sales be taken into the group? The sales of lands may be
another group. To which group shall we assign the sale of
a piece of land and the slaves attached to it? To answer
that question we may examine the sales of slaves and the
sales of lands to see if either group has peculiarities, the
recurrence of which in a sale of land and slaves might
decide. But we soon find that a slave was sold exactly like
a piece of land or any chattel. The only exception is that
certain guarantees are expected with the slave, which differ
from those demanded with a piece of land. On the whole,
then, the chief group will be <q>sales,</q> with subdivisions
according to the class of property used. Hence we cannot
assume that there was already present to legal consciousness
a difference between real and personal property, or in any
other sense that a slave was a person. He was a chattel.
</p>

<p>
The classification which will be adopted is not one that
will suit modern legal ideas. It depends on the form of
document alone. If two documents have the same type of
formula, they will be grouped together. A future revision
will, no doubt, assign to many of these a place in modern
schemes. But it is very easy to be premature in assigning
an ancient document to modern categories.
</p>

<p>
The groups will be subdivided according to subject-matter.
The order of the groups will be determined by the
greater or less complexity of the documents. It is best to
<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>
take those first which can be easily made out. The experience
gained in discussing them will be of great service in
dealing with more complicated cases. The reader must not,
however, suppose that no obscurities will remain. Subsequent
investigation will lead to redistribution. Each such
revision will, however, bring us nearer to sound results.
</p>

<p>
One of the most interesting and instructive methods of
dealing with a large collection of documents is to group
together the transactions, distributed over a number of
years, of one man, or of a single family. This method has
often been adopted and makes most fascinating reading.
</p>

<p>
Thus, M. V. Revillout, in the appendix to M. E. Revillout's
lectures entitled <hi rend='italic'>Les obligations en droit egyptien</hi>,
under the title of <hi rend='italic'>Une famille des commerçants</hi>, discussed
the interrelations of a large number of tablets published by
Strassmaier. These had a special connection, being found,
and practically kept, together. They are concerned chiefly
with the business transactions of three persons and their
descendants. The three men do not seem to have been
related, but to have become partners. The first transaction
in which they are concerned is an equitable division of property
which they had held in common. They and their descendants
lived side by side in Larsa and gradually extended
their possessions on every side. They were neighbors to two
wealthy landowners from whom and from whose descendants
they gradually acquired lands and houses. Especially did
two brothers, sons of one of the original three, buy up, piece
by piece, almost all the property of these two neighboring
families. Further, in acquiring a piece of land, they seem
to have come into possession of the deeds of sale, or leases,
of that plot, which had been executed by previous owners.
Thus, we can, in some cases, follow the history of a plot of
land during several reigns.
</p>

<p>
Such a collection of documents probably did not come
<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>
from the public archives, but from the muniment-chest of a
private family, or of a firm of traders. That duplicates of
some of these tablets should have been found in other collections,
points either to the collections having been purchased
from native dealers, who put together tablets from
all sources, or to the duplicates having been deposited in
public archives, as a kind of registration of title.
</p>

<p>
In Assyrian times the transactions of the great Rîmâni-Adadi,
the chief charioteer and agent of Ashurbânipal, who
for some thirteen years appears almost yearly, as buyer or
seller, lender or borrower, on some forty tablets, may serve
as a further example,<note place='foot'>A. D. D., iii., p.
83.</note> or we may note how Baḥiânu appears,
chiefly as a corn lender, year after year, for thirty-three
years, on some twenty-four tablets.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., vi., 218.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the Second Empire of Babylonia, Professor J. Kohler
and Dr. F. E. Peiser have given some fine examples of this
method. Thus, for the bankruptcy of Nabû-aplu-iddin,<note place='foot'>A.
B. R., iii., pp. 24 ff.</note>
they show that the creditors distrained upon the bankrupt's
property and found a buyer for most of it in a great
Neriglissar, afterwards King of Babylon. The first creditor
was paid in full, another received about half of the amount
due to him, a third about the same, while a fourth obtained
less than a quarter of what was owed him. They
also follow out the fortunes of the great banking firm of
Egibi<note place='foot'>A. B. R., iv., pp. 21 ff.</note>
for fully a century. The sketch, of course, is not
complete, and can only be made so by a prolonged search
through thousands of documents in different museums; but
it is intensely interesting and written with wonderful insight
and legal knowledge. Another example is the family, or
guild, of the priests of Gula.<note place='foot'>A. B. R.,
iv., pp. 41 ff.</note> This is less fully made out
but most valuable, as far as it goes. In both cases a genealogy
is given extending over many generations.
</p>

<pb n='xviii'/><anchor id='Pgxviii'/>

<p>
Later still, the Babylonian Expedition of the University
of Pennsylvania, in the ninth volume of Cuneiform Texts,
gives a collection of the business documents of one firm,
<q>Murashu Sons, of Nippur,</q> in the reign of Artaxerxes I.
Here we have to do with a family deed-chest, a collection
of documents found together and fortunately kept together.
</p>

<p>
But this method, attractive though it is, cannot be followed
here. The reader is best led on from the known to the unknown.
Those things must be taken first which must be
understood in order to appreciate what is placed later. We
consider first the law and the law-courts. The reader can
thus follow the references to procedure which occur in the
other sections. The rights of the State, the family, and the
private individual come next. Then we learn of the classes
of property and the various ways of disposing of it. After
that is taken up a variety of disconnected topics, whose
order is mainly indifferent. Some overlapping of divisions
is sure to occur in any order. This system has been found,
after many permutations, to present the least inconvenience.
</p>

<p>
While it is hoped that this volume will give a fairly complete
account of what is really known and also point out
some things that are reasonably conjectured to be true, it is
fully recognized that much remains to be done. Indeed, it
may serve by its omissions to redirect attention to openings
for future fruitful work.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxii'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>List Of Abbreviations</head>

<p>
A. B. R. <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem babylonischen Rechtsleben.</hi> Professor
J. Kohler and Dr. F. E. Peiser. Leipzig, 1890-.
</p>

<p>
A. D. B. <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Doomsday Book.</hi>
Vol. XVII of <hi rend='italic'>Assyriologische Bibliothek</hi>. Leipzig,
1901.
</p>

<p>
A. D. D. <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Deeds and Documents.</hi> In three vols.
Cambridge, 1898-.
</p>

<p>
A. J. S. L. <hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Semitic Languages and
Literatures.</hi> Chicago.
</p>

<p>
A. O. F. <hi rend='italic'>Altorientalische Forschungen.</hi> Dr. H. Winckler.
Leipzig, 1893-.
</p>

<p>
B. A. L. <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian and Assyrian Life.</hi> Professor
A. H. Sayce. New York, 1901. (Semitic Series.)
</p>

<p>
B. A. S. <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Assyriologie.</hi> Professors
Delitzsch and Haupt. Leipzig, 1890-.
</p>

<p>
B. E. P. <hi rend='italic'>The Babylonian Expedition of the University
of Pennsylvania.</hi> Series A. Cuneiform Texts. 1898-.
</p>

<p>
B. V. <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Verträge.</hi> Dr. F. E. Peiser. Berlin, 1890.
</p>

<p>
C. T. <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets, etc., in
the British Museum.</hi> London, 1896-.
</p>

<p>
D. E. P. <hi rend='italic'>Délégation en Perse, Memoires.</hi> Pub. by
French Ministry of Instruction. Professor V. Scheil. 1900-.
</p>

<p>
E. B. H. <hi rend='italic'>Early Babylonian History.</hi> Dr. H. Radau. New York, 1900.
</p>

<p>
H. A. B. L. <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Letters.</hi> Professor R. F.
Harper. Chicago, 1892-.
</p>

<p>
H. W. B. <hi rend='italic'>Assyrisches Handwörterbuch.</hi> Professor Delitzsch.
Leipzig, 1894.
</p>

<p>
I R., II R., III R., IV R., V R. <hi rend='italic'>The Cuneiform Inscriptions
of Western Asia.</hi> H. C. Rawlinson. London, 1861, 1866, 1870, 1880-4.
</p>

<p>
K. A. S. <hi rend='italic'>Keilinschriftliche Aktenstücke.</hi> Dr. F. E. Peiser.
Berlin, 1889.
</p>

<p>
K. B. <hi rend='italic'>Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek.</hi> Professor Eb. Schrader.
Berlin, 1889-.
</p>

<p>
K. L. Ḥ. <hi rend='italic'>The Letters and Inscriptions of Ḥammurabi.</hi> Three vols.
L. W. King, M.A. London, 1898-.
</p>

<p>
K. P. See A. B. R.
</p>

<p>
L. H. See K. L. Ḥ.
</p>

<p>
H. A. P. <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zum altbabylonischen Privatrecht.</hi> Dr. Br.
Meissner. Leipzig, 1893.
</p>

<p>
P. S. B. A. <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical
Archæology.</hi> London, 1872-.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rev. Ass.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Assyriologie.</hi>
Professors J. Oppert and E. Ledrain. Paris, 1884-.
</p>

<p>
Z. A. <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Assyriologie.</hi> Professor C. Bezold.
Leipzig, 1886-.
</p>

<p>
Z. K. F. <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Keilschriftforschung.</hi> Professor
C. Bezold. Leipzig, 1884-.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Camb.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cyr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dar.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ev. Mer.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nbd.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nbk.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nerig.</hi>, denote the volumes of
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Inschriften von
Cambyses</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cyrus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Darius</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Evil Merodach</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nabonidus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nebuchodonosor</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Neriglissar</hi>,
pub. by Pater J. N. Strassmaier. Leipzig, 1887-.
</p>

<p>
H denotes the text published in H. A. B. L.
</p>

<p>
K denotes a text from Kouyunjik, now in the British Museum.
</p>

<p>
S denotes a text at Constantinople, from Sippara.
</p>

<p>
V. A. Th. denotes a text in the Berlin Museum.
</p>

<p>
B, B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> denote texts of the collections
<q>from Warka,</q> Bu. 88-5-12, and Bu. 91-5-9.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sources And Bibliography</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Character of the available material</note>
The chief sources from which is derived our knowledge
of Babylonian and Assyrian law are the contemporary
inscriptions of the people themselves. These are not supplemented
to any appreciable extent by the traditions of
classical authors. So far as they make any references to
the subject, their opinions have to be revised by the immeasurably
greater knowledge that we now possess, and
seem to be mostly based upon <q>travellers' tales</q> and misapprehensions.
</p>

<p>
These inscriptions are now preserved in great numbers
in European and American museums, and have only been
partly published. The bibliography is very extensive.
For the earlier attempts to read and explain these documents
the reader may refer to Professor C. Bezold's <hi rend='italic'>Kurzgefässter
Überblick über die babylonisch-assyrische Litteratur</hi>,<note place='foot'>Pages
147-62.</note> which gives a fairly complete account up to 1887. Of
course, many books and memoirs there mentioned have now
only a historical interest for the story of decipherment and
explanation. These, however, may be studied with the
greatest profit after having first become acquainted with
the more recent works.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Division of subject</note>
The division which is adopted in this work, <q>law, contracts,
and letters,</q> is only conventional. The three groups
have much that is common and mutually supplement one
another. Previous publications have often treated them
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
more or less together, both as inscriptions and as minor
sources of history. Hence it is not possible to draw up
separate lists of books treating each division of the subject.
Only those books or articles will be referred to which are
most valuable for the student. Many of them give excellent
bibliographies of their special subject.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Laws and contracts</note>
The contemporary sources include actual codes of law, or
fragments of them, legal phrase-books, and legal instruments
of all sorts. From the last-mentioned source almost
all that is known of ancient Babylonian law has been derived.
The historical and religious inscriptions contribute
very little. The consequence is that, except from the recently
discovered Code of Ḥammurabi scarcely anything is
known of the law in respect to crimes. Contracts and
binding agreements are found in great profusion; but there
is nothing to show how theft or murder was treated. Marriage-contracts
tell us how adultery was punished. Agreements
or legal decisions show how inheritance was assigned.
Consequently our treatment of law and contracts
must regard them as inseparable, except that we may place
first the fragments of actual codes which exist.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters</note>
The letters are much more distinct. Each is a separate
study, except in so far as it can be grouped with others of
the same period in attempts to disentangle the historical
events to which they refer. The deductions as to life and
manners are no less valuable than those made from legal
documents. In both wording and subject-matter they often
illustrate legal affairs and even directly treat of them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Chronologically treated</note>
A first duty will be carefully to distinguish epochs.
Great social and political changes must have left some mark
upon the institutions we are to study. As far as possible,
the material has been arranged for each subject chronologically.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Code of Ḥammurabi</note>
The longest and by far the most important ancient code
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
hitherto discovered is that of Ḥammurabi
(<hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> 2250 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>).
The source for this is a block of black diorite about 2.25
metres high, tapering from 1.90 to 1.65 metres in circumference.
It was found by De Morgan at Susa, the ancient
Persepolis, in December, 1901, and January, 1902, in fragments,
which were easily rejoined. The text was published
by the French Ministry of Instruction from <q>squeezes</q> by
the process of photogravure, in the fourth volume of the <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires
de la Délégation en Perse</hi>. It was there admirably
transcribed and translated by Professor V. Scheil. In all,
the monument now preserves forty-four columns with some
three thousand six hundred lines. There were five columns
more, which were once intentionally erased and the stone repolished,
probably by the order of some monarch of Susa,
who meant to put his own name and titles there. There
have been found other monuments in the French explorations
at Susa, where the Elamite monarch has erased the inscription
of a Babylonian king and inserted his own. This
method of blotting out the name of a king was a favorite
device in the ancient East and is frequently protested
against and cursed in the inscription set up in Babylonia.
This particular inscription did not fail to call down similar
imprecations, which perhaps the Elamite could not read.
But he stayed his hand, and we do not even know his
name, for he wrote nothing on the vacant space.
</p>

<p>
It seems probable that the stone, or at any rate its original,
if it be a copy, was set up at Sippara; for the text
speaks of <hi rend='italic'>Êbarra šuati</hi>, <q>this Ebarra,</q> which was the
temple of Shamash at Sippara. At the head of the obverse
is a very interesting picture of Ḥammurabi receiving his
laws from the seated sun-god Shamash. Some seven hundred
lines are devoted to the king's titles and glory; to
enumerating the gods he reverenced, and the cities over
which he ruled; to invoking blessings on those who preserved
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
his monument and respected his inscription, with the
usual curses on those who did the opposite.<note place='foot'>Cf.
Appendix.</note> These belong
to the region of history and religion and do not concern us
here. We may note, however, that the king expected that
anyone injured or oppressed would come to his monument
and be able there to read for himself what were the
rights of his case.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later copies</note>
The whole of this inscription is not entirely new matter.
The scribes of Ashurbânipal somewhere found a copy, or
copies, of this inscription and made it into a series of tablets.
Probably their originals were Babylonian tablets, for
we know that in Babylonia the Code had been made into a
series which bore the name of <hi rend='italic'>Nînu ilu ṣîrum</hi>, from the
opening words of the stele. But, judging from the colophon
of the Assyrian series, the scribes knew that the inscription
came from a stele bearing the <q>image</q> of Ḥammurabi.
A number of fragments belonging to such copies
by later scribes were already published, by Dr. B. Meissner<note place='foot'>B.
A. S., III., pp. 473-523.</note> and Dr. F. E. Peiser.<note place='foot'>Jurisprudentiæ,
pp. 5-35.</note> These were further commented
upon by Professor Fr. Delitzsch,<note place='foot'>B. A. S., IV., pp.
78-87.</note> who actually gave them
the name <q>Code Hammurabi.</q> Some of these fragments
enable us to restore one or two sections of the lost five columns.
</p>

<p>
These fragments are now easily set in order and will
doubtless lead to the discovery of many others, the meaning
of which has not yet been recognized. They exhibit some
variants of interest, showing that they were not made
directly from this particular monument. Even at Susa
another fragment was found of a duplicate stele. Hence
we may hope to recover the whole text before long.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bibliography of this Code</note>
The publication of the Code naturally excited great interest
among scholars. It appeared in October, 1902, and,
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
during the next month, Dr. H. Winckler issued a German
translation of the Code under the title, <hi rend='italic'>Die Gesetze Hammurabis
Königs von Babylon um 2250 v. Chr. Das Älteste
Gesetzbuch der Welt</hi>, being <hi rend='italic'>Heft 4</hi>
of the fourth <hi rend='italic'>Jahrgang</hi>
of <hi rend='italic'>Der alte Orient</hi>. This marked an advance in some points
on Scheil's rendering, but is not entirely satisfactory. The
present writer read a paper in October, 1902, before the
Cambridge Theological Society, an abridged report of
which appeared in the January <hi rend='italic'>Journal</hi>. He further published
a baldly literal translation in February, 1903, entitled,
<hi rend='italic'>The Oldest Code of Laws in the World</hi>.<note place='foot'>T. and
T. Clark, Edinburgh.</note> In the <hi rend='italic'>Journal
des Savants</hi> for October and November, 1902, M. Dareste
gave a luminous account of the subject-matter of the
Code, especially valuable for its comparisons with the
other most ancient law-codes. This of course was based
on Scheil's renderings. In the <hi rend='italic'>Orientalistische Litteratur-Zeitung</hi>
for January, 1903, Dr. H. Winckler, reviewing
the fourth volume of the <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires</hi>, gave a useful account
of the Code comparing it with some of the previously published
fragments.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mosaic parallels</note>
The comparison with the Mosaic Code was sure to attract
notice, especially as Professor F. Delitzsch had called the
attention of the public to it, in his lecture entitled <hi rend='italic'>Babel
und Bibel</hi>, even before more of the Code was known than
the fragments from Nineveh. Dr. J. Jeremias has published
a small book called <hi rend='italic'>Moses und Hammurabi</hi>, in which
he deals with the relations pretty thoroughly. Professor
C. F. Kent has also examined them in his article entitled
<hi rend='italic'>The Recently Discovered Civil Code of Hammurabi</hi>, in
<hi rend='italic'>The Biblical World</hi> for March, 1903. Some remarks on the subject
are to be found in the <hi rend='italic'>New York Independent</hi>, December
11, 18, 1902, and January 8, 15, 22, 1903, accompanying
a translation. All the above follow Winckler's renderings.
</p>

<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>

<p>
The translation here given makes use of the above works,
but must be regarded as independent. It is impracticable
to detail and justify the changes made. The renderings can
hardly be regarded as final, where actual contracts do not
occur to illustrate the Code; but there is very little doubt
that we know the tenor of these laws with substantial accuracy.
</p>

<p>
Professor V. Scheil divided the text of the Code into sections
according to subject-matter. But there are no marks
of a division on the monument and Scheil's division is not
adhered to in this work. For convenience of reference,
however, his original section-numbers are given in connection
with each law or sub-section of a law.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The legal phrase-books</note>
Among the treasures preserved in the library of Ashurbânipal
and in the archives of the Babylonian temples were
a number of tablets and fragments of tablets which recorded
the efforts made by Semitic scribes to render Sumerian
words and phrases into Semitic. A large number of
these are concerned with legal subjects. A fairly complete
list of those now in the Kouyunjik Collections of the British
Museum will be found in the fifth volume of Dr. Bezold's
catalogue, page 2032. The greater part of them have
been published either in the British Museum <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptions
of Western Asia</hi>, in Dr. P. Haupt's <hi rend='italic'>Keilschrifttexten</hi>, Vol.
I. of the <hi rend='italic'>Assyriologische Bibliothek</hi>, or in Dr. F. Hommel's
<hi rend='italic'>Sumerische Lesestücke</hi>. In the latter will be found references
to other publications. Dr. B. Meissner further published
a number of later Babylonian editions of the same or
allied series.<note place='foot'>Z. A., VII., p. 16 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their plan</note>
The plan of the series to which most of these tablets
belong is well seen in Dr. Delitzsch's <hi rend='italic'>Assyrische Lesestücke</hi>,
fourth edition, pp. 112-14. The name by which the
series is usually known, to which most of these tablets
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
belong, is the Semitic rendering of the first Sumerian phrase
given there, <foreign rend='italic'>ana ittišu</foreign>, <q>to his side.</q>
The sections into which the series is divided each deal with some simple idea
and its expression in Sumerian. But the principle of arrangement
is not very clear. We may take one section for
example. <q>With him, with them, with me, with us, with thee,
with you,</q> are given in two columns, the first being the
Sumerian for these phrases, the second the Semitic rendering.
Owing to the form of treatment some of these texts
have been called <q>paradigms.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sumerian family laws</note>
But the scribes also gave some fairly long and connected
prose extracts in Sumerian with their Semitic renderings.
What these were extracted from is still a question. Some
of the clauses are known to have been employed in the
contracts. But some of these even may well have been
extracts from a code of laws. The name of <q>Sumerian
Family Laws</q> has been given to certain sections.<note place='foot'>Page
115 of Delitzsch's edition.</note> Others
seem to have been extracted from a Sumerian work on
agriculture, with which Hesiod's <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi> has
been compared. But at present we are not in possession
of the complete works from which these extracts are
taken.
</p>

<p>
Such as they are, they have a value beyond that of enabling
us to read Sumerian documents. They often afford
evidence of customs and information which we get nowhere
else.<note place='foot'>Dr. B. Meissner has made excellent use
of them in his <hi rend='italic'>Altbabylonische Privatrecht</hi>.</note>
The information given by them will be utilized in
the subsequent portions of this work. Their translation
here would serve no purpose, since they are very disconnected,
but an example may be of interest. One section
reads, <q>He fastens the buckets, suspends the pole, and
draws up the water.</q> This is a vivid picture of the working
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
of a watering-machine, from which we learn its nature
as we could not from its name only.<note place='foot'>H. W. B., p. 218a.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legal documents</note>
Legal documents constitute by far the larger portion of
the inscriptions which have come down to us from every
period of Babylonian and Assyrian history. In the library
of Ashurbânipal alone they are exceeded by the letters and
even more by the works dealing with astrology and omens.
In some periods, however, we have only a few inscriptions
from monuments, or bricks.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Real character of the contract tablets</note>
To some extent the term <q>contracts,</q> which has commonly
been applied to them, is misleading. The use of the term
certainly was due to a fundamental misunderstanding, they
being once considered as contracts to furnish goods. They
were even thought to be promises to pay, which passed
from hand to hand, like our checks, and so formed a species
of <q>clay money.</q> These views were both partially true,
but do not cover the whole ground.
</p>

<p>
They were binding legal agreements, sealed and witnessed.
They were binding only on the parties named in
them. They were drawn up by professional scribes who
wrote the whole of the document, even the names of the
witnesses. Hence it is inaccurate to speak of them as
<q>signed</q> by anyone but the scribe, who often added his
name at the end of the list of witnesses. The parties and
witnesses did impress their own seals at one period, but
later one seal, or two at most, served for all. It is not
clear whose seal was then used. But the document usually
declares it to be the seal of the party resigning possession.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their external form</note>
As to external form, most of those which may be called
<q>deeds</q> consist of small pillow-shaped, or rectangular,
cakes of clay. In many cases these were enclosed in an
envelope, also of clay, powdered clay being inserted to prevent
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
the envelope adhering. Both the inner and outer
parts were generally baked hard; but there are many examples
where the clay was only dried in the sun. The
envelope was inscribed with a duplicate of the text. Often
the envelope is more liberally sealed than the inner tablet.
This sealing, done with a cylinder-seal, running on an axle,
was repeated so often as to render its design difficult to
make out, and to add greatly to the difficulty of reading
the text. When the envelope has been preserved unbroken,
the interior is usually perfect, except where the
envelope may have adhered to it. Such double tablets are
often referred to as <q>case tablets.</q> The existence of two
copies of the same deed has been of great value for decipherment.
One copy often has some variant in spelling, or
phrasing, or some additional piece of information, that is of
great assistance. The envelope was rather fragile and in
many cases has been lost, either in ancient times, or broken
open by the native finders, in the hope of discovering gold
or jewels within. But in any case, the envelope, so long as
it lasted, was a great protection; and there are few tablets
better preserved than this class of document.
</p>

<p>
In Assyrian times, few <q>case</q> tablets are preserved,
they seem to have gone out of fashion except for money-loans
and the like. But it may be merely an accident that
so few envelopes are preserved. In the case of letters,
where the same plan of enclosing the letter in an envelope
was followed, hardly any envelopes have been found, because
they had to be broken open to read the letter. The
owner of a deed may have had occasion to do the same,
but here there was less excuse, as the envelope was inscribed
with the full text.
</p>

<p>
In early times, another method of sealing was adopted.
A small clay cone was sealed and the seal attached to the
document by a reed, which ran through both. The seal
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
thus hung down, as in the case of many old parchment
deeds in Europe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>How kept</note>
The deeds were often preserved in private houses, usually
in some room or hiding-place below ground. In the case
of the tablets from Tell Sifr, which were found by Loftus
<hi rend='italic'>in situ</hi>, three unbaked bricks were set in the form of a
capital U. The largest tablet was laid upon this foundation
and the next two in size at right angles to it. The
rest were piled on these and on the bricks and the
whole surrounded by reed matting. They were covered
by three unbaked bricks. This accounts for their fine
preservation.
</p>

<p>
Others were stored in pots made of unbaked clay. The
pots, as a rule, have crumbled away, but they kept out the
earth around. Sometimes this broke in and crushed the
tablets. In some cases they were laid on shelves round a
small room; but in others they seem to have been kept in
an upper story, and so were injured, when the floor fell
through.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The parties possessing copies</note>
It seems certain that as a rule all deeds were executed
in duplicate, each party receiving a copy. The scribe
often appears to have kept another. At one time copies
were also deposited in the public archives, most probably
the city temple or the governor's palace. There are indications
that copies of deeds executed in the provinces
were sent to the capital. Whether this was in pursuit of
a general policy of centralization or only accidental in the
few cases known to us is not quite clear. In many instances
we actually possess duplicates, sometimes three
copies of the same deed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Scope of legal documents</note>
These documents are exceedingly varied in contents.
The most common are deeds relating to the sale or lease
of houses, fields, buildings, gardens, and the like; the sale
or hire of slaves and laborers; loans of money, corn, dates,
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
wool, and the like; partnerships formed or dissolved; adoption,
marriage, inheritance, or divorce. But almost any
alienation, exchange, or deposit of property was made the
subject of a deed. Further, all legal decisions were embodied
in a document, which was sealed by the judge and
given to both parties to the suit. These were often really
deeds by which the parties bound themselves to accept and
abide by the decisions. Some are bonds or acknowledgments
of debt. A great many closely allied documents are
lists of money or goods which had been given to certain
persons. They were evidence of legal possession and
doubtless a check on demand for repayment.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General works on the subject</note>
The bibliography of the subject is best dealt with under
each general division; but reference must be made to works
dealing with the subject as a whole. Professor J. Oppert's
<hi rend='italic'>Documents Juridiques</hi> was the first successful attempt to
deal with contracts in general and laid the foundation of
all subsequent work. Dr. F. E. Peiser and Professor J.
Kohler's <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi> deals with the
later Babylonian documents as far as they throw light upon
social life and custom. Professor Sayce's <hi rend='italic'>Babylonians and
Assyrians</hi> makes large use of the data given by the contracts.
Dr. T. G. Pinches's <hi rend='italic'>The Old Testament in the Light
of the Monuments of Assyria and Babylonia</hi> also gives a
very full account of what may be gleaned from them. The
present writer's <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Deeds and Documents</hi> makes an
attempt to treat one branch fully. This work can only
present the most essential facts. The whole amount of
material is so vast, so much is yet unpublished, so many
side-issues arise, all worth investigating, that it can only
serve to introduce the reader to a fascinating and wide field
of study.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Different epochs represented</note>
The material with which we have to deal, for the
most part, falls very naturally into epochs. The early
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
Babylonian documents, though very numerous, are mostly
of the nature of memoranda and include few letters or contracts.
The documents of the First Dynasty of Babylon
are extremely rich in examples of both contracts and letters.
Then the Tell Amarna letters form a distinct group. The
Ninevite contracts and letters of the Sargonid Dynasty are
well marked as separate from the foregoing. Lastly, those
of the New Babylonian Empire are a group by themselves.
A few scattered examples survive which form intermediate
groups, usually too small to be very characteristic, and
certainly insufficient to justify or support any theory of the
intermediate stages of development.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Local features</note>
It must be observed that to a great extent these groups
are not only separated by wide intervals of time&mdash;several
centuries as a rule&mdash;but that they are locally distinct. The
first comes from Telloh, the larger part of the second from
Sippara, the third from Egypt (or Syria), the fourth from
Assyria, the last from Babylonia. Whether the documents
of Sippara in the third period showed as great divergence
from those of the second period as the Tell Amarna letters
do, or whether each group is fairly characteristic of its age
in all localities using the cuneiform script, are questions
which can only be answered when the other documents of
that period are available for comparison.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Characteristics of each group</note>
The documents of each group have marked characteristics
in form of script, in orthography, in language. So great
are the differences that a slight acquaintance with these
characteristics will suffice to fix the epoch of a given document.
For the most part, however, these characteristics
are not such as can appear in translation. They will be
pointed out as far as possible in the opening sections dealing
with each group. The aim will be to select characteristic
specimens of each group for translation and to append a
summary of what can be obtained by a study of the group.
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
The thousands of documents dealt with under these groups
would, if translated, require a library of volumes. In the
case of the contracts the repetition of scores of examples of
the same sort would be wearisome. In the case of the letters,
the translation alone would be almost as obscure as the
original, without copious comment on the relationships, customs,
and events referred to. In both cases it must be noted
that many of the most interesting examples are incomplete
and unavailable as specimens. The object of this work is to
show what are the most important laws or legal documents
of each period and to point out the chief subjects of information
to be gained from them. For the letters no such summary
of information can be given, partly because they are so
many and varied, partly because so few are yet available.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>First period: the early Babylonian</note>
The first epoch is to be considered as one period only
because its contribution to the subject is as yet small and
chronologically precedes the first great group. It ranges
from the earliest beginnings of history to somewhere about
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 2300. The dates are largely conjectural, but for the
most part the sequence of the events is known. It is the period
covered by Dr. H. Radau's <hi rend='italic'>Early Babylonian History</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Some very ancient documents fall under this period.
The early tablets which show the nearest approach to the
original picture-writing<note place='foot'>Such as that published
by Professor G. Barton, in the <hi rend='italic'>American Oriental
Society's Journal</hi>, 1902, pp. 19-28.</note> are transfers of property. As a
rule, however, such votive inscriptions do not come under
the head of contracts. One of the earliest of our monuments,
the Stele of Manistusu, King of Kish, records the
sale of land. Another very early monument of similar
style<note place='foot'>First published by Professor H. V. Hilprecht,
in <hi rend='italic'>Old Babylonian Inscriptions</hi>,
I., plates vi., vii., viii.; again with additions and corrections by Professor
V. Scheil, <hi rend='italic'>Receuil de Travaux</hi>, XXII., p. 29-36.</note>
deals with the sale of plots of land. Others will be
found in the <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Délégation en Perse</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
But by far the greatest number of inscriptions belong to
the finds of Telloh, made by De Sarzec in his explorations
for the French Government. His greatest find, some
thirty thousand tablets which were in the archives there,
was dispersed by the Arabs, and has found its way into
various museums. They have been sold in Europe, as
coming from different localities. It is certain that other
finds of the same period and same general character have
been made elsewhere, so that it is often difficult now to
determine their place of discovery.
</p>

<p>
A very large number of these tablets, from the collection
of T. Simon, now in the Berlin museums, were copied and
edited by G. Reisner, as <hi rend='italic'>Tempelurkunden aus
Telloh</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Heft XVI.</hi> of the
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus den Orientalischen Sammlungen, Berlin,
1901</hi>.</note> The
admirable abstracts of the contents there given<note place='foot'>Pages
vii-xviii and 1-58.</note> will furnish
all the information that anyone but a specialist will
need. They consist of lists of all sorts of natural products,
harvests from fields, seed and other expenses allowed for
cultivating fields, lists of the fields with their cultivators,
numerous receipts for loans or grants, accounts of sheep and
cattle, stipends or allowances for certain people; but only
one, number 125, is doubtfully said to concern a sale of some
slaves.
</p>

<p>
Dr. H. Radau, in his <hi rend='italic'>Early Babylonian History</hi>,
gives the texts of a large number of similar tablets.<note place='foot'>From
the <hi rend='italic'>E. A. Hoffman Collection of Babylonian Clay Tablets in the General
Theological Seminary, New York</hi>.</note>
He also classified, transliterated, and tentatively translated
most of them. The kind of information to be obtained
is well brought out in his notes and comments.<note place='foot'>Pages 322-29.</note> They
contain receipts, accounts of all sorts, lists of animals,
skins, wool, oil, wine, grain, pitch, and honey; but none
relate to the usual subjects treated in contract-tablets.
</p>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<p>
M. Thureau-Dangin edited and discussed a number of
tablets of the same character in the <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Assyriologie</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., pp. 69-86; V., page 3.</note>
Especially valuable is his memoir, <hi rend='italic'>L'accomptabilité agricole
en Chaldée</hi>,<note place='foot'>III., pp. 118-46.</note>
where many interesting facts are collected and
published.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The second period: the First Dynasty
of Babylon</note>
A very large number of texts of this period were published
by Mr. L. W. King, in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian
Tablets, etc., in the British Museum</hi>.<note place='foot'>Parts I.,
III., V., VII., IX., X.</note> These have
been discussed in a few instances by various writers in
scientific journals. In the short descriptions prefixed to
these editions mention is made of <q>contracts,</q> but it is
difficult to see to which the term could be properly applied.
</p>

<p>
A number of extracts from early <q>contracts</q> are given
by Professor V. Scheil in the recent files of the <hi rend='italic'>Receuil de
Travaux</hi>. According to the descriptions given, many of
them are legal instruments. Besides advances of grain
and receipts for the same,<note place='foot'>XVIII., p. 73,
XIX., pp. 54 ff., Nos. 1, 3, 11, 17, 20, 46, 48, 56,
330.</note> or sales of land,<note place='foot'>XVII., p. 30,
XIX., p. 58, No. 335.</note> we have a legal
decision concerning a marriage.<note place='foot'>XXII., p. 153
f.</note> Of several of these only a
few lines are given and the description of others is misleading.
They are mostly preserved at Constantinople. Some
are purely Sumerian, others Semitic. The same remarks
apply to this author's publications in his <hi rend='italic'>Une Saison de
fouilles à Sippar</hi>. Valuable as are the portions available,
they chiefly make us long for more.
</p>

<p>
A very large number of tablets belonging to the second
period are now in Europe and America. They seem to
have been purchased from dealers, either in the East or
West; and may be presumed to have been discovered by
the natives. No reliable information can therefore be had
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
as to their origin. Various places are mentioned: Sippara,
Abu Habba, Senkereh, Telloh, Warka, have all been stated
to be the place of discovery. There seems no good reason
why tablets of this period should not be found anywhere in
Babylonia. But on examination it is found that collections
said to be from widely different places contain duplicates;
while the same collection contains tablets dated at different
cities and with dates a thousand years apart. It is conceivable
that the records of important transactions, especially the
transfers of land, were deposited by order in the archives at
the capital, wherever that was for the time being. We may
imagine that the archives at Sippara or Larsa were afterwards
transferred to Babylon, for safety, or in pursuance
of a policy of centralization. Certain it is that a large
number of the texts imply a devotion to Shamash as chief
deity, while others ascribe the pre-eminence to Marduk or
Sin. But this fact is quite consistent with the archives
having been discovered in either Babylon or Sippara.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Present location of the
tablets: London</note>
On the other hand, it is not unlikely that the apparent
centralization is of purely modern production. The dealers
put together tablets from all sources and ascribe the collection
to the place of origin which best suits their fancy. As
a consequence, scarcely any collection contains a homogeneous
series belonging either to one period or source. This is
the more deplorable because so few are competent to date a
tablet by the style of writing upon it, and internal indications
are often lacking.
</p>

<p>
In the British Museum we have the following collections:
</p>

<p>
I. A number of <q>case</q> tablets brought from Tell Sifr by
Loftus in 1850. Owing to a misleading statement in Layard's
<hi rend='italic'>Nineveh and Babylon</hi>, p. 496, these have generally
been taken to be from Warka, the ancient Erech. But the
account given on pages 270-72 of Loftus, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
in Chaldea and Susiana</hi>, leaves no doubt of the
place and date of their discovery. These are usually denoted
by B.
</p>

<p>
II. A number of tablets now in the Kouyunjik Collections.
It is certain that these do not come from Nineveh,
and in the British Museum Catalogue they are usually ascribed
to Warka, but with an implied doubt. One or two
are dated at Erech. The D. T. Collection also contains
many tablets, said to be <q>not from Kouyunjik.</q>
</p>

<p>
III. The collection 81-7-1 contains some forty at least,
comprising the accounts of the temple of Ninib, from the
time of Ammiditana and Ammizaduga.
</p>

<p>
IV. The collection 82-7-14 also has a few tablets of this
period.
</p>

<p>
V. The collection 82-9-18 has at least one contract.
</p>

<p>
VI. The collection Bu. 88-5-18, purchased by Dr. E. A.
W. Budge in the East, consists of some seven hundred
tablets. They are said to come from Sippara; and date
from <hi rend='italic'>b.c.</hi> 2300 to the time of Darius. These will be
denoted by B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>.
</p>

<p>
VII. The collection Bu. 91-5-9, also purchased by Dr.
E. A. W. Budge in the East, consists of some three thousand
tablets. These will be denoted by B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The purchases for the British Museum also include a large
number of other tablets of this period. They are now numbered
consecutively, thus Bu. 91-5-9, 606 is known as Brit.
Mus. No. 92,679. This renders it difficult to further particularize
the contents of the collections; or to know whether
a given tablet belongs to one of the above collections.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Paris</note>
In the Museum of the Louvre at Paris are a few tablets
belonging to this epoch. Seven of them are published in
M. Heuzey's <hi rend='italic'>Découvertes en Chaldée</hi>.<note place='foot'>Pl.
41.</note>
</p>

<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Berlin</note>
At the Berlin Museum is a collection known by the name
of Homsy.
</p>

<p>
The tablets are marked V. A. Th., but this mark includes
other tablets widely separated in date and found at different
sites.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Philadelphia</note>
At the University of Pennsylvania collections known as
J. S., Kh., and H. contain tablets of this period. Professor
E. F. Harper, writing in <hi rend='italic'>Hebraica</hi>,<note place='foot'>V.,
pp. 74-76; and VI., pp. 59, 60.</note> gives some account of
these collections; from which it appears that the J. S.
collection contains tablets of Ḥammurabi, Samsuiluna, and
Ammiditana; while the Kh. collection has tablets of Ḥammurabi,
Samsuiluna, Ammiditana, and Ammizaduga. He
announced the discovery of the name of Abêshu on contemporary
documents,<note place='foot'>J. S., 41, 42, 43, 142, and Kh.
19, 198.</note> belonging to that reign. The two collections
contain over a thousand tablets. The H collection
has six hundred and thirty-two tablets, many of this epoch.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Constantinople</note>
In the Imperial Ottoman Museum at Constantinople are
a large number of tablets of this period. They are denoted
by N, the Nippur collection found by the American explorers
there; S, the Sippar collection from the explorations
conducted by Pater V. Scheil at Abu Habba; the T or Telloh
collection from the explorations of De Sarzec.
</p>

<p>
A few tablets are owned by Sir Henry Peek, Bart.
</p>

<p>
A few tablets exist in the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge,
the gift of Mr. Bosanquet.
</p>

<p>
The Rev. J. G. Ward possesses a tablet, published by
Dr. T. G. Pinches in <hi rend='italic'>P. S. B. A.</hi>, XXI., pp. 158-63, of the
time of Mana-balte-el, which seems to be of this period.
</p>

<p>
A number of other tablets of the period are known to be
in different museums or in the hands of private individuals.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Publications</note>
The historical value of the events used in dating these
tablets was recognized by G. Smith, who published the
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
dates of a number of the Loftus tablets, in the fourth volume
of the <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia</hi>, p. 36.
</p>

<p>
The earliest publication of the texts was by Pater J.
N. Strassmaier in the <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen des V Internationalen
Orientalistischen Congresses zu Berlin</hi>, 1881. In the
<hi rend='italic'>Beilage</hi> he gave the lithographed text of one hundred and
nine tablets under the title of <hi rend='italic'>Die altbabylonischen Verträge
aus Warka</hi>. He made many important observations
upon their character and style, and gave a valuable list
of words and names. As was to be expected from a first
attempt, both his readings of the texts and his transcriptions
from them leave room for some improvement. He
arranged his texts according to the reigns of the kings
mentioned.
</p>

<p>
This edition formed the subject of M. V. Revillout's
article, <hi rend='italic'>Une Famille commerçant de Warka</hi>, and of numerous
articles by other scholars in the journals. Dr. B. Meissner
seems to have collated a number of these texts for his
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zum altbabylonischen Privatrecht</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In 1888, Dr. T. G. Pinches published <hi rend='italic'>Inscribed Babylonian
Tablets in the possession of Sir Henry Peek, Bart.</hi>
It was followed by other parts and by <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian and
Assyrian Cylinder-seals and Signets in the possession of Sir
Henry Peek, Bart.</hi>, in 1890. These are most valuable for
their full treatment&mdash;photographs of the originals, drawings,
and descriptions of the seals, transliterations, translations,
and comments, giving a better idea of what these documents
are like than can be obtained without actually handling
the originals. Dr. Pinches in his introduction assigns their
discovery to the ruins of Sippara. The texts published by
him only include three from our period, Nos. 1, 13, 14;
but nowhere will a beginner find more assistance in his
studies of this class of tablet.
</p>

<p>
In 1893 Dr. B. Meissner published his invaluable <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
zum altbabylonischen Privatrecht</hi>, Vol. XI. of Delitzsch
and Haupt's <hi rend='italic'>Assyriologische Bibliothek</hi>. This gave a full
transliteration and translation of one hundred and eleven
texts published in autography. Full notes and comments
were added giving practically all that could then be said on
the subject. His introduction summarized the information,
to be extracted from his texts, bearing on the social institutions
of Babylonia. By arranging the texts in classes according
to their purport and contents he was able to elucidate
each text by comparison with similar documents and so
to gain a very clear idea of the meaning of separate clauses,
even when the exact shade of meaning of individual words
remained obscure. Any advance which the interpretation
of these documents may make must be based on his researches
and follow his methods. He gave a useful glossary,
but no list of proper names.
</p>

<p>
In the fourth volume of Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Keilinscriftliche Bibliothek</hi>,
1896, Dr. F. E. Peiser adopted the plan of arranging
the then known contract-texts in chronological order.
He gave, in transliteration and translation, the texts of
thirty-one tablets of this period. Of these many had been
previously published by Strassmaier and Meissner, but Dr.
Peiser's renderings and short notes are of great value.
</p>

<p>
In 1896 began the grand series of publications, <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform
Texts from Babylonian Tablets, etc., in the British
Museum, printed by order of the Trustees</hi>, which has been
continued to the present date. Volumes II., IV., VI., and
VIII. contain copies by Dr. T. G. Pinches of no fewer than
three hundred and ninety-five texts from the B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
and B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
Collections. They also contain a number of letters and
other texts, some of a date as late as Xerxes, but from the
same two collections.
</p>

<p>
In the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society</hi>,1897<note place='foot'>Page 589 f.</note> and
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
1899,<note place='foot'>Page 103 f.</note>
Dr. T. G. Pinches gives transliterations, translations,
and comments upon fifteen of these texts.
</p>

<p>
A word of notice must be given to the excellent Guides
published by the trustees of the British Museum. The
<hi rend='italic'>Guide to the Kouyunjik Gallery</hi>, with four autotype plates,
1885, and the <hi rend='italic'>Guide to the Nimroud Central Saloon</hi> are
now superseded by the <hi rend='italic'>Guide to the Babylonian and Assyrian
Antiquities</hi> with thirty-four plates, photographic
reproductions of the originals, 1900. On pages 104-13
will be found a most useful account of the class of tablet
and short descriptions of ninety-four exhibited case tablets.
Most of these tablets have been published by Strassmaier
or in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts</hi>, but are now indicated by their new
registration numbers.
</p>

<p>
It will be evident from the above remarks that only a
small proportion of the material in our museums has yet been
published. It is greatly to be desired that every existing tablet
should be published, as in no other way can we hope to
solve many important problems. Not only the chronology
but much of the actual history can be recovered from these
tablets, while the names of the witnesses and parties to the
transactions will settle the order of the years which are still
doubtful. It is from these deeds that the greater part of
this work will be constructed. They form the groundwork,
while later documents fill in details.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The chronological system</note>
The years were given names. Thus the second year of
Ḥammurabi is called <q>the year in which Ḥammurabi the
king established the heart of the land in righteousness.</q>
The year often received its name from the capture of some
city. Are we to suppose that these events actually occurred
on the first day of the year? If not, by what name
was the year called up to the occurrence of the event in
question? There is evidence that some years passed by
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
two names, one of which was probably conferred after the
year had begun. An examination of all dated tablets
would doubtless result in fixing the time of the year at
which the new year-name came into use. This can only be
achieved by the custodians of our great collections. But,
speaking generally, it seems obvious that names were often
given to the years which attached to them a memory of
the previous rather than a record for the current year.
When in after years scribes drew up lists of the dates of
a reign, they may well have made mistakes as to the exact
year in which an event took place and have also credited a
king with too long a reign, by counting as separate years
two dates which were really the alternatives for one and
the same year. In this way we may perhaps account for
the discrepancies between the Chronicle and the King
Lists.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Key to the order of events in a reign</note>
The tablets often mention the name of the reigning king
as well as the year-name; thus we read as a date, <q>the year
when Samsuiluna was king,</q> followed by <q>the year in
which the canal of Samsuiluna named Ḥegallu was dug,</q>
which was the year-name of Samsuiluna's fourth year.
Also the parties often swore an oath to observe their contract
by the name of one or more gods and of the reigning
king. Hence, very often, when the date is not preserved
at all, we know what reign was concerned. On the other
hand, in some reigns we have dated tablets from almost
every year. If all the tablets were published, the witnesses
and other parties would enable us to fix the sequence of
the years. As these year-names each give a prominent
event for the year we could thus reconstruct a skeleton
history of the reign. Indeed, the present writer had already
determined the order of several years, in more than one
reign, from consideration of the persons named in each. Of
course, no assurance could thus be had that some intermediate
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
years were not omitted in such a scheme, since
there is no certainty that we know the name-dates for each
year of a reign. The order of the kings themselves and
the lengths of their reigns were already known from the
King List published by Dr. T. G. Pinches.<note place='foot'>P. S. B. A.,
1884, pp. 193-204.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The chronicle of the king</note>
It seemed probable that the scribes of those days would
have made lists of the year-names, in order to know
how much time had elapsed since a given event had occurred.
Hence great was the excitement and delight when
in <hi rend='italic'>C. T. VI.</hi> was published a tablet which once contained
a list of year-names from Sumuabu to Ammizaduga. This
was followed by the publication in Mr. L. H. King's
<hi rend='italic'>Letters of Ḥammurabi</hi> of a duplicate, which served to
restore and complete the list down to the tenth year of
Ammizaduga's reign. Mr. King further added the year-names
actually used on the dated tablets then published;
thus showing how the year-names of the list were quoted
and either abbreviated or expanded. He very appropriately
called this the <hi rend='italic'>Chronicle of the Kings of Babylon</hi>. In
the meantime Professor A. H. Sayce had given a translation
of the first published list.<note place='foot'>P. S. B. A.,
XXI., pp. 11-17, January, 1899.</note> In the fourth volume of the
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur semitischen
Sprachwissenschaft</hi>,<note place='foot'>Pages 338-409.</note> Dr. E. Lindl
has given a full discussion of the first published list. He
further adds a small list of the same character giving the
year-names in order for part of the reigns of Ḥammurabi
and Samsuiluna.<note place='foot'>Pages 342-43.</note>
Dr. Lindl used the published dates of
the contracts to complete and restore the first list. Thus
a great deal of excellent work has been done on these lists.
None of them are complete for the whole dynasty, nor even
for the part which they originally covered, and the known
dated documents do not serve to fully restore them. But
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
so far as they go, they must take the precedence of the
King List, being almost contemporary documents.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other kings mentioned</note>
Besides the kings of the First Dynasty of Babylon the
collections above referred to designate several other persons
as kings. Thus the B collection of the British Museum
names Nûr-Adadi, Sin-idinnam, and Rim-Sin as kings. The
texts enable us to fix all these as kings of Larsa. Hence
evidently the Tell Sifr, where these tablets were found, was
in the territory of Larsa. The whole question is well discussed
by Dr. Lindl.<note place='foot'>B. A. S., IV., pp. 382
ff.</note> The date on the tablet B. 34a refers
to the setting-up of a throne for Shamash by Nûr-Adadi.
The date on B. 35 refers to the completion of a temple in
Eridu by Sin-idinnam, King of Larsa. It is scarcely conceivable
that these refer to other than the Nûr-Adadi, who
set up the kingdom of Larsa in the south of Babylonia
about the same time as Sumuabi founded the dynasty of
Babylon. Sin-idinnam, his son, succeeded him as King of
Larsa and claimed to be King of Shumer and Akkad.
Elam, however, under Kudurnanhundi I., invaded the
south, defeated Sin-idinnam and set up Rim-Sin as King
of Larsa. It seems that Rim-Sin reigned thirty-seven
years, partly as vassal of Ḥammurabi, from the seventeenth
year of Sin-mubalit until the thirty-first of Ḥammurabi.
Whether Sin-idinnam was then restored to his throne as
vassal of Ḥammurabi, or whether Rim-Sin was succeeded
by a second Sin-idinnam, or whether the restoration of
Sin-idinnam, after a temporary expulsion of Rim-Sin, took
place within the thirty-seven years of the latter's reign, is
not yet clear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Era of Isin</note>
Of great interest is the fact of the use of an era in the
south of Babylonia. A large number of tablets are dated
by the years after the capture of Isin. Thus tablets are
dated in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 13th, 18th,
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
22nd, 23rd, 26th, 27th, 28th, and 30th years after the capture
of Isin. Most of them are related to the kingdom ruled by
Rim-Sin, which clearly included Tell Sifr, Nippur, Eridu,
as well as Larsa.<note place='foot'>See Lindl, B. A. S., IV.,
pp. 384-85.</note> The first year of this era was probably
the seventeenth year of Sin-mubalit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various historical identifications</note>
A king Immeru is mentioned,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
58, 346. B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 318, 2439a, 2527, V. A. Th.
863.</note> usually alone, but once
with Sumu-lâ-ilu;<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
318.</note> where the form of the oath, <q>by Shamash
and Immerum, by Marduk and Sumu-lâ-ilu,</q> suggests
that while Sumu-lâ-ilu was king of Babylon, the Marduk city,
Immeru was king of a Shamash city. As he comes first,
he was probably king of Sippara, where Shamash was the
city god, and whence the collections, B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, and V. A. Th.,
seem, on other grounds, to have come. That it was needful
to name Sumu-lâ-ilu also points to that king being overlord
of Sippara at the time.
</p>

<p>
The king Ilu-ma-ilu, named<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
380, 2378.</note> in the oaths, associated with
Shamash, may well be a vassal king of Sippara, though
Professor Delitzsch<note place='foot'>B. A. S., IV., p. 363,
foot-note.</note> suggests that he may be the first king
of the second dynasty of Babylon, whose name appears in
the King list B as Ilu-ma(ilu).
</p>

<p>
The king Mana-balte-el, on the Rev. J. G. Ward's tablet,
seems to belong to the First, or Second, Dynasty, perhaps
as a vassal king, but may have preceded them by
some short period.
</p>

<p>
The king Bungunu-ilu, mentioned by King,<note place='foot'>L. H.,
III., p. 220, note 16.</note> was associated
with Sumu-lâ-ilu. Probably he was vassal king of
Sippara before Immeru.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The third epoch: the Kassite kings</note>
A number of extracts from the legal documents of the
third period have been given by Father V. Scheil in the <hi rend='italic'>Receuil
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
de Travaux</hi>.<note place='foot'>Vol. XIX., pp. 56 ff.,
Nos. 70, 133, 147, 266, 572.</note> The full text is rarely given and there
is consequently nothing for use here. They come from Nippur
and are at Constantinople. The Semitic language is
used largely, but a few Sumerian phrases remain. All the
names of persons except those of the kings are pure Babylonian.
The determinative of personality before proper names
is common, but not before a king's name. The tablets
are dated by regnal years, no longer by year-names. The
kings have a determinative of divinity before their names.
The money in use is either gold or bronze, silver is hardly
named, while in other epochs it is almost always used.
Gold was now legal tender, as silver was afterwards.
</p>

<p>
The many extremely fine charters of this period are of
great value for the questions concerning land tenure. Descriptions
and figures of some of them will be found in
the Guide.<note place='foot'>Pages 85-89.</note>
The text of several was published by Dr. C.
W. Belser,<note place='foot'>B. A. S., II., pp.
111-205.</note> under the title <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Kudurru-inschriften</hi>.
Some of these are transliterated and translated in
Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Keilschriftliche
Bibliothek</hi>,<note place='foot'>III.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>,
p. 154 f., 164 f.; IV., p. 56 f.</note> where references to
the literature will be found. In many cases these charters
or boundary-stones are the only monumental evidence for
their period. They therefore figure largely in the histories.
</p>

<p>
Some of the best examples are found in the second volume
of the <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Délégation en Perse</hi>, beautifully
reproduced by photogravure, admirably transliterated and
translated by Professor V. Scheil. Some fine examples are
also to be found in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian
Tablets, etc., in the British Museum</hi>.<note place='foot'>The so-called
<hi rend='italic'>Caillou de Michaux</hi> was published I. R. 70, and discussed by Oppert,
<hi rend='italic'>Doc. Jur.</hi>, pp. 87 ff., and Boissier, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches
sur quelques contrats babyloniens</hi>, K. B., IV., pp. 78 ff. A fine charter
from the time of Merodach-baladan I. was published IV. R. 38, discussed by Oppert,
<hi rend='italic'>Doc. Jur.</hi>, pp. 129 ff., and K. B. IV., pp. 60 ff. Another
of the same date was published, K. B. IV., pp. 164 ff.</note>
</p>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<p>
Of the time of Marduk-shum-iddin, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 853-833, we have
a black boundary-stone, published by Dr. F. E. Peiser, in
<hi rend='italic'>Keilschriftliche Acten-stücke</hi>, No. 1. It is dated in the
twenty-eighth year of the reign of Nabû-aplu-iddina, <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 858, and the eleventh year
of Marduk-shum-iddina, <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 842. It rehearses the contents of two or more deeds
by which a certain Kidinu came into possession of property
in the city of Dilbat.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Cappadocian tablets</note>
The Cappadocian tablets are still somewhat of a problem.
The first notice of them was given by Dr. T. G.
Pinches.<note place='foot'>P. S. B. A., November 1,
1881.</note> According to the dealer's account one acquired
by the British Museum had come from Cappadocia. The
script was then quite unfamiliar and it was thought that
they were written in a language neither Semitic nor Akkadian.
Various attempts, which are best forgotten, were
made to transcribe and translate them under complete
misapprehension of the readings of the characters. But in
1891 Golénischeff published twenty-four tablets of the same
stamp, which he had acquired at Kaisarieh. His copies
were splendidly done for one who could make out very little
meaning. But he showed that many words were Assyrian
and read many names. Professor Delitzsch<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Abhand.
d. phil. hist. Classes der K. Sachs. Ges. d. Wiss.</hi> 1893, No. IV.</note> made a
most valuable study of them, and laid the foundation for
their thorough understanding. Professor P. Jensen<note place='foot'>Z. A.,
IX., pp. 62-81.</note> added
greatly to our knowledge of their reading and interpretation.
Dr. F. E. Peiser then<note place='foot'>K. B., IV., pp.
50-56.</note> gave a transcription and
translation of nine texts of contracts.
</p>

<p>
They are now recognized to be purely Semitic. They
must have been written in some place where Assyrian influence
was all-powerful. There are many names compounded
of Ashur. They are dated by eponyms as in Assyria. The
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
discovery of many more of them at Boghaz Keui, Kara
Eyuk, and elsewhere published by Professor V. Scheil in the
<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Mission en Cappadoce par Ernest Chantre</hi>,
and commented on by M. Boissier,<note place='foot'>P. S. B. A.,
XXII., p. 106 f.</note> make it certain that
they are from this region.
</p>

<p>
If subject to Assyria, their date may be before the earliest
eponyms whose date is known from the Canon lists.
They may be contemporary with the very earliest kings of
Assyria. But it is not impossible that the eponyms referred
to were local only and not Assyrian in origin. Dr. Peiser
put them after the First Dynasty of Babylon, but before
the Third Dynasty.
</p>

<p>
They are full of unusual forms of words and have a
phraseology of their own. They cannot as yet be translated
with any confidence. In general they are very similar
to the contracts, money-loans, and letters of the First
Dynasty of Babylon. As far as they can be understood,
they offer no new features of interest. The obscure phrases
and words give rise to many speculations which will be
found in the above-mentioned works. These are of great
interest, but need further data for elucidation. They are
too questionable to be profitably embodied here.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Elamite contracts</note>
The Elamite contract-tablets were found at Susa and are
published by Professor V. Scheil in Tome IV. of the <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires
de la Délégation en Perse</hi>.<note place='foot'>Pages 169-94.</note>
</p>

<p>
In external form they closely resemble the Babylonian
documents of a similar nature. They are drawn up in practically
the same way. But there is a blunt directness about
them which recalls the usages of the First Dynasty of Babylon,
rather than Assyria, or the Second Babylonian Empire.
Hence we have little to indicate date. Until we are better
acquainted with the Elamite script at various periods we
cannot hope to date them.
</p>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<p>
They have many peculiar words and phrases. Some may
be Elamite, or that form of Semitic which obtained in Elam,
but the rest of the language is ordinary Babylonian. It is
possible that some characters had a value in Elam not
known in Babylonia, or ideographic values not yet recognized.
But, as a rule, the general sense is fairly clear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fourth epoch: Assyria</note>
The legal documents of Assyria are in many respects a
separate group. They are sometimes said to have come from
the library of Ashurbânipal, which Mr. H. Rassam claims
to have discovered at Kouyunjik in 1852-54. But it seems
far more probable that, as large numbers were already found
by Layard in 1849-51, we have rather to do with the contents
of some archives. The absence of any large number
of temple-accounts seems to exclude the probability that they
were connected with a temple; but the fact that nearly every
tablet has for one principal party some officer of the king,
lends great probability to the view that the transactions
were really made on behalf of the king; or&mdash;to be more exact&mdash;of
the palace in Nineveh. The exceptions may be
accounted for as really deeds concerned with former sales;
or mortgages of property, finally bought in for the king.
The conjecture is raised to a moral certainty by the contents
of such a collection as Knudtzon's <hi rend='italic'>Gebete an den Sonnengott</hi>,
found together with them; which consisted of
copies of the requests and inquiries made of the Sun-god
oracle regarding the troubles and difficulties of the king and
royal family, domestic as well as public, in the reigns of
Esarhaddon and Ashurbânipal. The letters too, found in
the same collection, are the letters received by the king
from his officers in all parts of his realm. The lists are
connected with expenses of his household. Such votive
tablets as are preserved are concerned with offerings of the
royal family, or such high officers as probably were permanent
inmates of the palace. We have, in fact, the contents
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
of the muniment chests of the Sargonid kings of Assyria.
That the royal library was mixed up with these documents
may be due to the contents of an upper chamber falling,
when its floor was burnt out; but the mixing may have
been done by the discoverers.
</p>

<p>
In a very real sense these come from a record office, but
are confined to royal rather than state documents; though
a few duplicates of charters occur. Hence we look in vain
for many classes of documents, such as are common in the
archives of temples or private families. We have no marriage
settlements, no adoptions, no partnerships.
</p>

<p>
Can we believe that such transactions were less common
in Nineveh than fifteen centuries before in Sippara, or
Larsa, or Babylon; or later in Babylon, Sippara, or Nippur?
There cannot be a shadow of doubt that such documents
exist in shoals somewhere in the ruins of Nineveh
and will one day be found. Hence we must regard it as
extremely improbable that the ordinary citizens of Nineveh
contributed the records of their transactions to the Kouyunjik
Collections now in the British Museum. They
either kept them in their own houses or in some temple
archives. As will be seen later, a few have already been
found; but it is extremely difficult to locate them exactly.
It is quite certain that a few of the tablets in the British
Museum were found at other localities, such as Sherif
Khan, Ashur, Kalah, Erech, Larsa, and Babylon.
</p>

<p>
For the most part these appear to have been placed in
one collection by the discoverers, and only internal evidence
can now decide where they were found. But the great bulk
of the Kouyunjik Collections, as far as contracts, legal documents,
and kindred tablets are concerned, are the result of explorations
conducted on the site of the ancient Nineveh, by
Layard and Rassam. They probably came from palace archives,
and as a result possess a special character of their own.
</p>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Aramaic dockets</note>
Aramaic dockets very early attracted the attention of
Assyriologists. The presence of short inscriptions in
Aramaic on a few contract-tablets naturally raised hopes,
in the early days of decipherment, of finding some check
upon the reading of cuneiform. So far as these went
they were by no means inconsistent with the readings of
the cuneiform. But they were too few, too disconnected,
and in themselves too uncertain, to be of great value.
Indeed, for many of them, it is the cuneiform that now gives
the key to their possible sense. The whole of these Aramaic
inscriptions have now been published by Dr. J. H.
Stevenson in his <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Contracts with
Aramaic Reference Notes</hi>, where references to the literature
will be found.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The collections of tablets</note>
In connection with these Aramaic legends a number of
the texts of Assyrian contracts were published in the
<hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Pars Secunda</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tomus
I</hi>. A number more were published in Vol. III. of the
<hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia</hi>, by Sir H. C.
Rawlinson. A few others were published in various
journals; and by Oppert in his epoch-making treatise on
the juristic literature, <hi rend='italic'>Documents Juridiques</hi>; by Peiser, in
Vol. IV. of Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek</hi>; and
by Strassmaier in his <hi rend='italic'>Alphabetisches Verzeichnis</hi>. The
whole of the texts of the Assyrian contracts from the
Kouyunjik Collections in the British Museum are now
published in <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Deeds and Documents recording the
Transfer of Property, etc.</hi> (three volumes published).<note place='foot'>Deighton,
Bell &amp; Co., Cambridge, England.</note> A
bibliography will be found there, on page ix of the preface
to Vol. I.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their peculiar style</note>
The very remarkable style which most of these tablets
show is so unlike the contemporary documents in Babylonia
that we may expect that transactions between private
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
citizens in Assyria at this time were quite different. A few
such documents exist. Professor V. Scheil, in the <hi rend='italic'>Receuil
de Travaux</hi>,<note place='foot'>Vol. XX., pp. 202
ff.</note> published the text of four which are quite
unlike any of the Kouyunjik examples.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The plan of arrangement in the volume</note>
In <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Deeds and Documents</hi> the same plan of
arrangement was followed, to some extent, as in this work.
Being all of one epoch and showing no signs of any development
the tablets were grouped, provisionally, according to
subjects. The arrangement in each group was to place first
the best specimens of the group and then the injured and
fragmentary specimens, which thus received illustration,
and in some cases, could be restored. It would, however,
be an error to regard the Assyrian documents as the intermediate
link between the old and new Babylonian documents,
though they belong chronologically to an interval
which precedes the latter immediately. The Assyrian
scribe used a formula that was closer to the Old Babylonian
than to the contemporary Babylonian. It had
an independent development, looking rather to the royal
charters as models than to the private document. In fact,
the closest parallels of all are to be found on the Babylonian
boundary-stones and charters. When, therefore, in
our chronologically arranged sketch of a given subject,
reference is made to Assyrian usage, next to that of the
First Dynasty of Babylon, it will be understood that only
the nature of the transaction is akin; and that, as a rule, the
verbal treatment of it is quite distinct.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Contemporary Babylonian documents</note>
A few contemporary documents have reached us from
the cities of Babylonia. They have little or no affinity
with the immediately preceding groups, but carry on the
local development from the second epoch. They come from
many sites and are published in a variety of journals. A
tentative list of them will be found in the Appendix.
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
They refer to transactions in the reigns of Shalmaneser
IV., Sargon II., Merodach-baladan II., Sennacherib, Esarhaddon,
Shamash-shum-ukin, Kandalanu, Ashur-etil-ilâni,
and Sin-shar-ishkun. In style they belong to the next epoch.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fifth epoch: the second Babylonian empire</note>
The second Babylonian empire, commencing with Nabopolassar
and extending to the end of the independent existence
of a Babylonian empire, is represented by thousands of
tablets in our museums. A small part of these has been
published. Pater J. N. Strassmaier has given some one
thousand six hundred in his <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte</hi>. Dr. Peiser
published many more in his <hi rend='italic'>Keilinschriftliche Acten-stücke
and Babylonische Verträge</hi>. The Rev. B. T. A. Evetts,
Dr. Moldenke, Dr. Pinches and others have published
many more. A detailed list will be found in the Appendix.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Persian Empire, and later</note>
In the times of the Persian kings very many documents
were drawn up very similar to these. The series is quite
unbroken, down through Macedonian rule, the Arsacid
period, to as late as <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 82. The list will be found in the
Appendix.
</p>

<p>
Of the whole period we may say that the variety and
quantity of written evidence are amazing. Every sort of
transaction that could be made the subject of a deed or
memorandum was written down. They come from most of
the chief cities in Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Classification</note>
The classification of this material is no easy task. As in
the case of the Bibliography, so here, the first and apparently
the only attempt has been made by Dr. C. Bezold in
his invaluable <hi rend='italic'>Kurzgefasster Überblick</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The view taken there depended upon Professor Oppert's
estimate of the nature of the documents and that again was
often founded on imperfect copies of the text. A great
advance has since been made in understanding the contents
of the texts then published, and the number published has
enormously increased.
</p>

<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<p>
The publications, where accompanied by translations,
have generally given some classification. Dr. Peiser, in the
fourth volume of Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek</hi>,
gives most suggestive indexes.<note place='foot'>Pages
xi-xx.</note> Dr. Tallqvist, in his
<hi rend='italic'>Sprache der Contrakte Nabunâ'id's</hi> gives a very valuable
classification.<note place='foot'>Pages xi-xviii.</note>
Dr. Meissner classified his texts in <hi rend='italic'>Altbabylonische
Privatrecht</hi>.
</p>

<p>
A number of monographs have been written collecting
the different texts from many sources bearing on one subject,
thus acting as a kind of classification. A complete
work on the subject is still needed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Monographs</note>
Of great importance are Dr. F. E. Peiser's <hi rend='italic'>Jurisprudentiæ
Babylonicæ quæ supersunt, Cöthen</hi>, 1890 (Inaug. Diss.);
Dr. B. Meissner's <hi rend='italic'>De Servitute babylonico-assyriaca</hi>, Leipzig,
1882 (Inaug. Diss.); and Dr. V. Marx, <hi rend='italic'>Die Stellung
der Frauen in Babylonien (Nebuchadnezzar to Darius <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
604-485)</hi> published in the <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Assyriologie</hi>, Vol.
IV., pp. 1-77. These should certainly be read by any serious
student of the times. To reproduce their contents
would occupy too much space.
</p>

<p>
On the whole subject of social life, as illustrated by these
contracts, there is a valuable study by Dr. F. E. Peiser,
called <hi rend='italic'>Skizze der Babylonischen Gesellschaft</hi>.<note place='foot'>In
the <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der Vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft</hi>, 1896, No.
3.</note> Professor Sayce's <hi rend='italic'>Babylonians and
Assyrians</hi> in the <hi rend='italic'>Semitic Series</hi>,
1900, is an excellent account, though in some respects not
sufficiently critical. But in all such preliminary work it is
easy to feel sure of conclusions which have to be revised
with fuller knowledge. Time will doubtless show this to
be true of what is said in the present work. But wherever
doubt is felt by the writer, it will be indicated.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Laws And Contracts</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Earliest Babylonian Laws</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nature of the oldest Babylonian laws</note>
We are still completely in the dark as to the rise of law
in Babylonia. As far back as we can trace the history or its
written monuments, there is no time of which we can say,
<q>As yet there was no law.</q> Our chief object to-day is to discover
what the law was. For the most part, and until lately,
we were compelled almost entirely to infer this from such
contracts as were drawn up between parties and sworn to,
witnessed, and sealed. Among them were a large number
of legal decisions which recorded the ruling of some judicial
functionary on points of law submitted to him. These and
the hints given by the legal phrase-books had allowed us
to attain considerable knowledge of what was legal and
right in ancient Babylonia or Assyria.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Data hitherto uncertain</note>
But the question remained, Was it <q>right</q> or <q>law</q>?
Were there enactments by authority, making clear what was
right, and in some cases creating right, where there was none
before? There was much to suggest the existence of enacted
law, even of a code of laws, and the word <q>law</q> had been
freely applied. But there was no known ascription of
any law to a definite legislator. There was no word for
<q>law,</q> only the terms <q>judgments,</q> <q>right,</q> and <q>wrong.</q>
It was significant that the parties to a suit always seemed
to have agreed on what was right between man and man,
and then to have sworn by their gods to observe the
<q>right.</q>
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evidence that there were very ancient codes</note>
We definitely know of one great code of laws, that of
Ḥammurabi, and we are greatly strengthened in the view
that there were laws, and even codes, centuries before him.
The way in which contracts quote the phrases of his code is
exactly parallel to the way in which far earlier contracts
quote phrases which are evidently extracts, in the phrase-books,
from some connected work. Hence we are warranted
in thinking that these extracts come from a Sumerian code
of laws. We do not yet know to whom we should ascribe
its compilation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Codes antecedent to that of Ḥammurabi</note>
For the Code of Ḥammurabi is also a compilation. He
did not invent his laws. Phrases found in them appear
in contracts before his time. Doubtless he did enact some
fresh laws. But he built for the most part on other men's
foundations. The decisions already passed by the judges
had made men ready to accept as <q>right</q> what was now
made <q>law.</q> But the question is only carried back a stage
further. Did not those judges decide according to law? In
some cases we know they did, for we have the law before
them. When we try to penetrate further into the background
of history we can only surmise. Documents fail us
to prove whether judges first made or administered the law.
But we have now a very high antiquity for laws recognized
and obeyed as right.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sumerian laws found in the phrase-books</note>
That laws were already enacted in the pre-Semitic or Sumerian
days we may regard as certain. The legal phrase-books
drawn up by later scribes, especially those known as
forming the series called <foreign rend='italic'>ana ittišu</foreign>, give as
specimens certain laws. These were evidently given by the scribes as examples
of connected prose in Sumerian, accompanied by a rendering
into Semitic. Their object was primarily grammatical,
or at any rate educational; but they are most valuable because
they contain specimens of the Sumerian legislation.
Owing to their limited scope they were at first regarded as
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
family laws. But there can be little doubt that they really
are extracts from something like a code of laws. We are
as yet quite ignorant of the date of their first promulgation,
place of origin, and legislator. The seventh tablet of the
series <foreign rend='italic'>ana ittišu</foreign>, Col. III. l. 22 to Col. IV. l. 22,
gives the seven following laws:
</p>

<note place='margin'>Repudiation of father by son</note>
<quote rend='display'>
I. If a son has said to his father, <q>You are not my father,</q> he may
brand him, lay fetters upon him, and sell him.
</quote>

<p>
It may be doubted whether this applies to any but
adopted sons. <q>You shall not be my father</q> is a possible rendering.
But the phrase may only refer to rebellious conduct.
The word rendered <q>brand</q> has often been taken to mean
<q>shave.</q> The cutting short of the hair was a mark of degradation.
The Semitic Babylonians wore their hair long, while
slaves, and perhaps also Sumerians as a race, are represented
as hairless. However that may be, the same word is used of
<q>branding</q> cattle and it implies cutting or incision. It may
mean a tattooed mark. The word rendered <q>fetter</q> seems
also to be used of a branded body-mark. The whole law
means that the rebellious son is to be degraded to the status
of a slave and treated as such.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Repudiation of mother by son</note>
<quote rend='display'>
II. If a son has said to his mother, <q>You are not my mother,</q>
one shall brand his forehead, drive him out of the city, and make him
go out of the house.
</quote>

<p>
Here the same ambiguity about branding is found. Some
take the word rendered <q>forehead</q> to mean the hair of the
head. His head would then be shaved. <q>To go out from
the house</q> means <q>to be cut off from kith and kin.</q> But
here the son retains his freedom, only he is an exile and
homeless. In this case it is not the mother who exacts the
penalty. The verb is plural and may be taken impersonally.
The family or the city magistrates are probably the ones to
execute the law.
</p>

<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>

<note place='margin'>Disinheritance of son by father</note>
<quote rend='display'>
III. If a father has said to his son, <q>You are not my son,</q> he shall
leave house and yard.
</quote>

<p>
Here the father has power to repudiate a son, who must
go. The word for <q>leave</q> is literally <q>take himself up,</q>
<q>go up out of.</q> The word <q>yard</q> is simply <q>inclosure</q>
and may mean the city walls, as a symbol of shelter.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Disinheritance of son by mother</note>
<quote rend='display'>
IV. If a mother has said to her son, <q>You are not my son,</q> he
shall leave house and property.
</quote>

<p>
Here we expect, by analogy with Laws I. and II., that this
penalty is rather less than that in III. The <q>property</q>
means <q>house furniture.</q> The son must leave home and can
take no house furniture with him. He has no claim to
inherit anything. But he need not leave the city. Hence
it seems likely that III. denied him the right of city shelter.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Repudiation of husband by wife</note>
<quote rend='display'>
V. If a wife hates her husband and has said, <q>You are not my
husband,</q> one shall throw her into the river.
</quote>

<note place='margin'>Repudiation of wife by husband</note>
<quote rend='display'>
VI. If a husband has said to his wife, <q>You are not my wife,</q> he
shall pay half a mina of silver.
</quote>

<p>
The contrast in the penalties is startling. Note the impersonal
form of V. The executioners here are the family,
or city, not the husband. Publicity is therefore implied.
It is not a private quarrel, but a refusal of conjugal rights.
In the second case the man divorces, or puts away, his wife,
but pays a heavy fine.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Responsibility of employer</note>
<quote rend='display'>
VII. If a man has hired a slave and he dies, is lost, has fled, has
been incapacitated, or has fallen sick, he shall measure out 10
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of
corn <foreign rend='italic'>per diem</foreign> as his wages.
</quote>

<p>
Here the Sumerian text differs from the Semitic. In the
former the employer is said to <q>cause</q> the slave to suffer
these detriments, in the latter he is said to come by them.
The verb rendered <q>lost</q> is used in that sense in the later
Code of Ḥammurabi. What is the exact sense of the verb
rendered <q>has been incapacitated</q> is not clear. Professor
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
Hommel<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sumerische Lesestücke</hi>,
p. 112.</note> renders <emph>durchbrennen</emph>, Delitzsch<note place='foot'>H.
W. B., p. 542.</note> renders <emph>weichen,
entweichen, oder zu arbeiten aufhören</emph>. But it is clear that the
employer is to pay a daily fine for injury done to the slave,
or for loss to his owner, caused or connived at by him. The
slave's refusal to work could not be made the ground for
fining him. If anyone paid for that it would be the owner.
The employer pays for his work, but is bound to keep
him safe and treat him reasonably well and return him in
good condition to his owner. In later times the owner often
took the risk of death and flight, but then he probably
charged more hire. At any rate it is clear that the owner
is not named in this law.
</p>

<p>
It is not profitable to discuss these mere fragments of a
code. The most interesting thing is their existence. We
may one day recover the Code in full. These are not retranslations
into Sumerian, by learned scribes, of late laws. For
exactly these words and phrases occur in the contracts of the
First Dynasty of Babylon, before and after the Code of Ḥammurabi,
which deals with the same cases, but in different
words. In fact, this Sumerian Code is quoted, as the later
Code was quoted, in documents which embody the sworn
agreement of the parties to observe the section of the Code
applying to their case. This is indeed the characteristic
of the early contracts: after indicating the particulars of
the case, an oath is added to the effect that the parties
will abide by the law concerning it. Even where no reference
is made to a law, it is because either no law had
been promulgated on the point, or because the law was understood
too well to need mention. Later this law-abiding
spirit was less in evidence and the contract became a private
undertaking to carry out mutual engagements. But even
then it was assumed that a law existed which would hold the
parties to the terms of an engagement voluntarily contracted.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='II. The Code Of Hammurabi'/>
<head>II. The Code Of Ḥammurabi</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Witchcraft and the ordeal by water</note>
§ 1. If a man has accused another of laying a
<foreign rend='italic'>nêrtu</foreign> (death spell?)
upon him, but has not proved it, he shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
§ 2. If a man has accused another of laying a
<foreign rend='italic'>kišpu</foreign> (spell) upon
him, but has not proved it, the accused shall go to the sacred river,
he shall plunge into the sacred river, and if the sacred river shall
conquer him, he that accused him shall take possession of his house.
If the sacred river shall show his innocence and he is saved, his accuser
shall be put to death. He that plunged into the sacred river
shall appropriate the house of him that accused him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>False witness in capital suit</note>
§ 3. If a man has borne false witness in a trial, or has not established
the statement that he has made, if that case be a capital trial,
that man shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In civil case</note>
§ 4. If he has borne false witness in a civil law case, he shall pay
the damages in that suit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Judgment once given not to be altered</note>
§ 5. If a judge has given a verdict, rendered a decision, granted
a written judgment, and afterward has altered his judgment, that
judge shall be prosecuted for altering the judgment he gave and
shall pay twelvefold the penalty laid down in that judgment.
Further, he shall be publicly expelled from his judgment-seat and
shall not return nor take his seat with the judges at a trial.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Burglary and acceptance of stolen goods</note>
§ 6. If a man has stolen goods from a temple, or house, he shall
be put to death; and he that has received the stolen property from
him shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dealings with irresponsible persons</note>
§ 7. If a man has bought or received on deposit from a minor or
a slave, either silver, gold, male or female slave, ox, ass, or sheep, or
anything else, except by consent of elders, or power of attorney, he
shall be put to death for theft.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theft</note>
§ 8. If a patrician has stolen ox, sheep, ass, pig, or ship, whether
from a temple, or a house, he shall pay thirtyfold. If he be a
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
plebeian, he shall return tenfold. If the thief cannot pay, he shall
be put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Procedure in case of the discovery of lost property</note>
§ 9. If a man has lost property and some of it be detected in the
possession of another, and the holder has said, <q>A man sold it to
me, I bought it in the presence of witnesses</q>; and if the claimant
has said, <q>I can bring witnesses who know it to be property lost by
me</q>; then the alleged buyer on his part shall produce the man who
sold it to him and the witnesses before whom he bought it; the
claimant shall on his part produce the witnesses who know it to be
his lost property. The judge shall examine their pleas. The witnesses
to the sale and the witnesses who identify the lost property
shall state on oath what they know. Such a seller is the thief and
shall be put to death. The owner of the lost property shall recover
his lost property. The buyer shall recoup himself from the seller's
estate.
</p>

<p>
§ 10. If the alleged buyer on his part has not produced the seller
or the witnesses before whom the sale took place, but the owner
of the lost property on his part has produced the witnesses who
identify it as his, then the [pretended] buyer is the thief; he shall
be put to death. The owner of the lost property shall take his lost
property.
</p>

<p>
§ 11. If, on the other hand, the claimant of the lost property
has not brought the witnesses that know his lost property, he has
been guilty of slander, he has stirred up strife, he shall be put to
death.
</p>

<p>
§ 12. If the seller has in the meantime died, the buyer shall take
from his estate fivefold the value sued for.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Judgment by default</note>
§ 13. If a man has not his witnesses at hand, the judge shall set
him a fixed time not exceeding six months, and if within six months
he has not produced his witnesses, the man has lied; he shall bear
the penalty of the suit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Kidnapping</note>
§ 14. If a man has stolen a child, he shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abduction of slave</note>
§ 15. If a man has induced either a male or female slave from the
house of a patrician, or plebeian, to leave the city, he shall be put
to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Harboring a fugitive slave</note>
§ 16. If a man has harbored in his house a male or female slave
from a patrician's or plebeian's house, and has not caused the fugitive
to leave on the demand of the officer over the slaves condemned to
public forced labor, that householder shall be put to death.
</p>

<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The capture of a fugitive slave</note>
§ 17. If a man has caught either a male or female runaway slave
in the open field and has brought him back to his owner, the owner
of the slave shall give him two shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 18. If such a slave will not name his owner, his captor shall
bring him to the palace, where he shall be examined as to his past
and returned to his owner.
</p>

<p>
§ 19. If the captor has secreted that slave in his house and afterward
that slave has been caught in his possession, he shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
§ 20. If the slave has fled from the hands of his captor, the latter
shall swear to the owner of the slave and he shall be free from blame.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Burglary</note>
§ 21. If a man has broken into a house he shall be killed before
the breach and buried there.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Highway robbery</note>
§ 22. If a man has committed highway robbery and has been
caught, that man shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
§ 23. If the highwayman has not been caught, the man that has
been robbed shall state on oath what he has lost and the city or
district governor in whose territory or district the robbery took place
shall restore to him what he has lost.
</p>

<p>
§ 24. If a life [has been lost], the city or district governor shall
pay one mina of silver to the deceased's relatives.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theft at a fire</note>
§ 25. If a fire has broken out in a man's house and one who has
come to put it out has coveted the property of the householder and
appropriated any of it, that man shall be cast into the self-same fire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Duties and privileges of an officer
over the levy</note>
§ 26. If a levy-master, or warrant-officer, who has been detailed
on the king's service, has not gone, or has hired a substitute in his
place, that levy-master, or warrant-officer, shall be put to death and
the hired substitute shall take his office.
</p>

<p>
§ 27. If a levy-master, or warrant-officer, has been assigned to
garrison duty, and in his absence his field and garden have been
given to another who has carried on his duty, when the absentee has
returned and regained his city, his field and garden shall be given
back to him and he shall resume his duty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights and duties of his son</note>
§ 28. If a levy-master, or warrant-officer, has been assigned to
garrison duty, and has a son able to carry on his official duty, the
field and garden shall be given to him and he shall carry on his
father's duty.
</p>

<p>
§ 29. If the son be a child and is not able to carry on his father's
duty, one-third of the field and garden shall be given to his mother
to educate him.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalty for neglect of his benefice</note>
§ 30. If such an official has neglected the care of his field, garden,
or house, and let them go to waste, and if another has taken his
field, garden, or house, in his absence, and carried on the duty for
three years, if the absentee has returned and would cultivate his
field, garden, or house, it shall not be given him; he who has taken
it and carried on the duty connected with it shall continue to do so.
</p>

<p>
§ 31. If for one year only he has let things go to waste and he
has returned, his field, garden, and house shall be given him, and he
himself shall carry on his duty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His ransom, if captured</note>
§ 32. If such an official has been assigned to the king's service
(and captured by the enemy) and has been ransomed by a merchant
and helped to regain his city, if he has had means in his house to
pay his ransom, he himself shall do so. If he has not had means of
his own, he shall be ransomed by the temple treasury. If there has
not been means in the temple treasury of his city, the state will
ransom him. His field, garden, or house shall not be given for his
ransom.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Duties of district governors</note>
§ 33. If either a governor or a prefect has appropriated to his own
use the corvée, or has accepted and sent on the king's service a
hired substitute in his place, that governor, or prefect, shall be put
to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Governors not to oppress subordinates</note>
§ 34. If either a governor, or a prefect, has appropriated the
property of a levy-master, has hired him out, has robbed him by
high-handedness at a trial, has taken the salary which the king gave
to him, that governor, or prefect, shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The benefice of a levy-master, warrant-officer,
or tributary inalienable</note>
§ 35. If a man has bought from a levy-master the sheep, or oxen,
which the king gave him, he shall lose his money.
</p>

<p>
§ 36. The field, garden, or house, of a levy-master, warrant-officer,
or tributary shall not be sold.
</p>

<p>
§ 37. If a man has bought field, garden, or house, of a levy-master,
a warrant-officer, or tributary, his title-deed shall be destroyed
and he shall lose his money. He shall return the field, garden, or
house to its owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Not to be bequeathed to his family</note>
§ 38. A levy-master, warrant-officer, or tributary, shall not bequeath
anything from the field, garden, or house of his benefice to
his wife or daughter, nor shall he give it for his debt.
</p>

<p>
§ 39. From the field, garden, or house which he has bought and
acquired, he shall make bequests to his wife, or daughter, or shall
assign for his debt.
</p>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The obligation resting upon a
buyer of real estate</note>
§ 40. A votary, merchant, or resident alien may sell his field,
garden, or house, and the buyer shall discharge the public service
connected with the field, garden, or house that he has bought.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A benefice not to be exchanged</note>
§ 41. If a man has given property in exchange for the field,
garden, or house, of a levy-master, warrant-officer, or tributary, such
an official shall return to his field, garden, or house, and he shall appropriate
the property given in exchange.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibilities of land-tenants</note>
§ 42. If a man has hired a field to cultivate and has caused no
corn to grow on the field, he shall be held responsible for not doing
the work on the field and shall pay an average rent.
</p>

<p>
§ 43. If he has not cultivated the field and has left it alone, he
shall give to the owner of the field an average rent, and the field
which he has neglected he shall break up with mattocks and plough
it, and shall return it to the owner of the field.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rent of unbroken land</note>
§ 44. If a man has taken a piece of virgin soil to open up, on a
three years' lease, but has left it alone, has not opened up the land,
in the fourth year he shall break it up, hoe it, and plough it, and
shall return it to the owner of the field, and shall measure out ten
<foreign rend='italic'>GUR</foreign> of corn for each
<foreign rend='italic'>GAN</foreign> of land.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loss of crop by storm apportioned between
landlord and tenant</note>
§ 45. If a man has let his field to a farmer and has received his
rent for the field but afterward the field has been flooded by rain, or
a storm has carried off the crop, the loss shall be the farmer's.
</p>

<p>
§ 46. If he has not received the rent of his field, whether he let it
for a half, or for a third, of the crop, the farmer and the owner of
the field shall share the corn that is left in the field, according to
their agreement.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Landlord cannot restrain a satisfactory
tenant from subletting</note>
§ 47. If a tenant farmer, because he did not start farming in the
early part of the year, has sublet the field, the owner of the field
shall not object; his field has been cultivated; at harvest-time he
shall take rent, according to his agreement.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Abatement of debt on account of
storm, flood, or drought</note>
§ 48. If a man has incurred a debt and a storm has flooded his
field or carried away the crop, or the corn has not grown because of
drought, in that year he shall not pay his creditor. Further, he
shall post-date his bond and shall not pay interest for that year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights in a crop pledged for debt</note>
§ 49. If a man has received money from a merchant and has given
to the merchant a field, planted with corn, or sesame, and has said
to him, <q>Cultivate the field and reap and take the corn, or sesame,
that shall be grown</q>; if the bailiff has reared corn, or sesame, in the
field, at harvest-time the owner of the field shall take what corn, or
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
sesame, has been grown in the field and shall pay corn to the merchant
for his money that he took of him and its interest, and for
the maintenance of the bailiff.
</p>

<p>
§ 50. If the field he gave was [already] cultivated, or the sesame
was grown up, the owner of the field shall take the corn, or sesame,
that has been grown in the field, and shall return the money and its
interest to the merchant.
</p>

<p>
§ 51. If he has not money enough, he shall give to the merchant
sesame, or corn, according to its market price, for the money which
he took from the merchant and its interest, according to the king's
standard.
</p>

<p>
§ 52. If the bailiff has not reared corn or sesame in the field the
debtor's obligation shall not be lessened.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Riparian responsibilities</note>
§§ 53, 54. If a man has neglected to strengthen his dike and has
not kept his dike strong, and a breach has broken out in his dike,
and the waters have flooded the meadow, the man in whose dike the
breach has broken out shall restore the corn he has caused to be lost.
[54]. If he be not able to restore the corn, he and his goods shall be
sold, and the owners of the meadow whose corn the water has carried
away shall share the money.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalty for neglect to shut off water</note>
§ 55. If a man has opened his runnel for watering and has left it
open, and the water has flooded his neighbor's field, he shall pay
him an average crop.
</p>

<p>
§ 56. If a man has let out the waters and they flood the young
plants in his neighbor's field, he shall measure out ten
<foreign rend='italic'>GUR</foreign> of corn
for each <foreign rend='italic'>GAN</foreign> of land.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Damage done to growing crop by sheep</note>
§ 57. If a shepherd has not agreed with the owner of the field to
allow his sheep to eat off the green crop and without consent of the
owner has let his sheep feed off it, the owner of the field shall
harvest his crop, but the shepherd who without consent of the
owner of the field caused his sheep to eat it shall give to the owner
of the field, over and above his crop, twenty
<foreign rend='italic'>GUR</foreign> of corn for each
<foreign rend='italic'>GAN</foreign> of land.
</p>

<p>
§ 58. If, after the sheep have come up out of the meadows and
have passed into the common fold at the city gate, a shepherd has
placed his sheep in a field and caused his sheep to feed in the field,
the shepherd shall keep the field he has grazed, and, at harvest-time,
he shall measure out to the owner sixty
<foreign rend='italic'>GUR</foreign> of corn for each <foreign rend='italic'>GAN</foreign>
of land.
</p>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cutting down a tree without permission</note>
§ 59. If a man without the consent of the owner has cut down a
tree in an orchard, he shall weigh out half a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rent of a garden-plot</note>
§§ 60, 61. If a man has given a field to a gardener to plant a
garden and the gardener has planted the garden, he shall train the
garden four years; in the fifth year the owner of the garden and the
gardener shall share the garden equally, the owner of the garden
shall gather his share and take it. [61]. If the gardener, in planting
the garden, has not planted all, but has left a bare patch, he
shall reckon the bare patch in his share.
</p>

<p>
§ 62. If he has not planted the field which was given him as
a garden; then, if it was arable land, the gardener shall measure
out to the owner of the field an average rent for the years that
were neglected, and shall perform the stipulated work on the
field (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, make it into a garden),
and return it to the owner of
the field.
</p>

<p>
§ 63. If the land was uncultivated, he shall do the stipulated work
on the field, and return to the owner of the field and shall measure
out for each year ten <foreign rend='italic'>GUR</foreign>
of corn for each <foreign rend='italic'>GAN</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Garden rented on shares</note>
§ 64. If a man has given his garden to a gardener to farm, the
gardener, as long as he holds the garden, shall give the owner of the
garden two-thirds of the produce of the garden and shall take one-third
himself.
</p>

<p>
§ 65. If the gardener has not tilled the garden and has diminished
the yield, the gardener shall pay an average rent.
</p>

<p>
Here came the five erased columns, of which the three
following sections are restored from copies in Ashurbânipal's
library:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Obligations of owner to gather a date-crop
assigned for debt</note>
§ X. [If a man has borrowed money of a merchant and has given
a date grove] to the merchant and has said to him, <q>Take the dates
that are in my grove for your money</q>; that merchant shall not
consent, the owner of the grove shall take the dates that are
in the grove and shall answer to the merchant for the money and
its interest, according to the tenor of his agreement, and the
owner of the grove shall take the surplus of the dates that are in
the grove.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Eviction of house-tenant</note>
§ Y. [If a man has let a house] and the tenant has paid to the
owner of the house the full rent for a term of years, and if the
owner of the house has ordered the tenant to leave before his time
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
is up, the owner of the house, because he has ordered his tenant to
leave before his time is up, [shall repay a proportionate amount]
from what the tenant has paid him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Acceptance of goods in payment
of debt, in default of money or corn</note>
§ Z. [If a man has borrowed money of a merchant] and has not
corn or money wherewith [to pay], but has goods; whatever is in
his hands, he shall give to the merchant, before the elders. The
merchant shall not object; he shall receive it.
</p>

<p>
After the loss of about thirty-five sections the Code
resumes:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility of a travelling salesman</note>
§ 100. [If an agent has received money of a merchant, he shall
write down the amount] and [what is to be] the interest of the
money, and when his time is up, he shall settle with his merchant.
</p>

<p>
§ 101. If he has not had success on his travels, he shall return
double what he received to the merchant.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Robbery, substantiated by oath, a valid excuse</note>
§§ 102, 103. If the merchant has given money, as a speculation,
to the agent, who during his travels has met with misfortune, he
shall return the full sum to the merchant. [103]. If, on his travels,
an enemy has forced him to give up some of the goods he was carrying,
the agent shall specify the amount on oath and shall be acquitted.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility to be indicated
by legal receipts</note>
§ 104. If a merchant has given to an agent corn, wool, oil, or
any sort of goods, to traffic with, the agent shall write down the
money value, and shall return that to the merchant. The agent
shall then take a sealed receipt for the money that he has given to
the merchant.
</p>

<p>
§ 105. If the agent forgets and has not taken a sealed receipt for
the money he gave to the merchant, money that has not been
acknowledged by receipt shall not be put down in the accounts.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment of fraud of an agent</note>
§ 106. If an agent has taken money of a merchant, and his principal
suspects him, that principal shall prosecute his agent, put him
on oath before the elders, as to the money taken; the agent shall
pay to the merchant threefold what he misappropriated.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fraud practiced by principal</note>
§ 107. If the principal has overcharged the agent and the agent
has [really] returned to his principal whatever his principal gave him,
and if the principal has disputed what the agent has given him, that
agent shall put his principal on oath before the elders, and the merchant,
because he has defrauded the agent, shall pay to the agent
sixfold what he misappropriated.
</p>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fraud in ordinary drink-traffic</note>
§ 108. If the mistress of a beer-shop has not received corn as the
price of beer or has demanded silver on an excessive scale, and has
made the measure of beer less than the measure of corn, that beer-seller
shall be prosecuted and drowned.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Connivance at unlawful assemblages</note>
§ 109. If the mistress of a beer-shop has assembled seditious slanderers
in her house and those seditious persons have not been captured
and have not been haled to the palace, that beer-seller shall be
put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Drink-traffic forbidden to votaries</note>
§ 110. If a votary, who is not living in the convent, open a beer-shop,
or enter a beer-shop for drink, that woman shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rate of payment with produce</note>
§ 111. If the mistress of a beer-shop has given sixty
<foreign rend='italic'>ḲA</foreign> of <foreign rend='italic'>sakani</foreign>
beer in the time of thirst, at harvest, she shall take fifty
<foreign rend='italic'>ḲA</foreign> of corn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Carrier's liability for misappropriation of goods</note>
§ 112. If a man staying abroad has given silver, gold, precious
stones, or portable goods to another man to transport, and if that
man has not delivered the consignment, where he has carried it, but
has appropriated it, the owner of the consignment shall prosecute
him, and the carrier shall give to the owner of the consignment fivefold
whatever was intrusted to him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Unauthorized seizure of goods denied a creditor</note>
§ 113. If a man has a debt of corn, or money, due from another
and without the consent of the owner of the corn has taken corn
from the granary, or barn, the owner of the corn shall prosecute
him for taking the corn from the granary, or barn, without his consent,
and the man shall return all the corn he took, and further lose
whatever it was that he had lent.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment of vexatious distraint</note>
§ 114. If a man has no debt of corn or money due from a man on
whom he has levied a distraint, for each such distraint he shall pay
one-third of a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Creditor responsible for fair treatment
of a man held as security for debt</note>
§ 115. If a man has corn or money due from another man and
has levied a distraint and the hostage has died a natural death in the
house of the creditor, he cannot be held responsible.
</p>

<p>
§ 116. If the hostage has died of blows or want in the house of
the creditor, the owner of the hostage shall prosecute his creditor,
and if the deceased were free born, the creditor's son shall be put to
death; if a slave, the creditor shall pay one-third of a mina of silver,
Further, he shall lose whatever it was that he lent.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Limitations on the holding of such hostages</note>
§ 117. If a man owes a debt, and he has given his wife, his son,
or his daughter [as hostage] for the money, or has handed someone
over to work it off, the hostage shall do the work of the creditor's
house; but in the fourth year he shall set them free.
</p>

<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>

<p>
§ 118. If a debtor has handed over a male or female slave to work
off a debt, and the creditor proceeds to sell same, no one can complain.
</p>

<p>
§ 119. If a man owes a debt, and he has assigned a maid who has
borne him children for the money, the owner of the maid shall repay
the money which the merchant gave him and shall ransom his maid.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility of owners of warehouses</note>
§ 120. If a man has deposited his corn for safe keeping in another's
house and it has suffered damage in the granary, or if the
owner of the house has opened the store and taken the corn, or has
disputed the amount of the corn that was stored in his house, the
owner of the corn shall declare on oath the amount of his corn, and
the owner of the house shall return him double.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rate of payment for storage of corn</note>
§ 121. If a man has stored corn in another man's house he shall give,
on each <foreign rend='italic'>GUR</foreign> of corn, five
<foreign rend='italic'>ḲA</foreign> of corn, yearly, as the rent for storage.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Receipt for deposit of valuables</note>
§ 122. If a man has given another gold, silver, or any goods
whatever, on deposit, all that he gives shall he show to witnesses,
and take a bond and so give on deposit.
</p>

<p>
§ 123. If he has given on deposit without witnesses and bonds,
and has been defrauded where he made his deposit, he has no claim
to prosecute.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility of bankers</note>
§ 124. If a man has given on deposit to another, before witnesses,
gold, silver, or any goods whatever, and his claim has been contested,
he shall prosecute that man, and [the man] shall return double what
he disputed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their own losses no excuse</note>
§ 125. If a man has given anything whatever on deposit, and,
where he has made his deposit, something of his has been lost
together with something belonging to the owner of the house, either
by house-breaking or a rebellion, the owner of the house who is in
default shall make good all that has been given him on deposit,
which he has lost, and shall return it to the owner of the goods.
The owner of the house shall look after what he has lost and recover
it from the thief.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Depreciation of property</note>
§ 126. If a man has said that something of his is lost, which is
not lost, or has alleged a depreciation, though nothing of his is lost,
he shall estimate the depreciation on oath, and he shall pay double
whatever he has claimed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Slander of votary or married woman</note>
§ 127. If a man has caused the finger to be pointed at a votary,
or a man's wife, and has not justified himself, that man shall be
brought before the judges, and have his forehead branded.
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marriage-bonds</note>
§ 128. If a man has taken a wife and has not executed a marriage-contract,
that woman is not a wife.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment of flagrant adultery</note>
§ 129. If a man's wife be caught lying with another, they shall
be strangled and cast into the water. If the wife's husband would
save his wife, the king can save his servant.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rape of a betrothed virgin</note>
§ 130. If a man has ravished another's betrothed wife, who is a
virgin, while still living in her father's house, and has been caught in
the act, that man shall be put to death; the woman shall go free.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Suspicion of adultery cleared by oath</note>
§ 131. If a man's wife has been accused by her husband, and has
not been caught lying with another, she shall swear her innocence,
and return to her house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ordeal of water permissible to accused wife</note>
§ 132. If a man's wife has the finger pointed at her on account of
another, but has not been caught lying with him, for her husband's
sake she shall plunge into the sacred river.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights and duties of the wives of
those who have been taken captive in war</note>
§ 133. If a man has been taken captive, and there was maintenance
in his house, but his wife has left her house and entered into
another man's house; because that woman has not preserved her
body, and has entered into the house of another, that woman shall
be prosecuted and shall be drowned.
</p>

<p>
§ 134. If a man has been taken captive, but there was not maintenance
in his house, and his wife has entered into the house of another,
that woman has no blame.
</p>

<p>
§ 135. If a man has been taken captive, but there was no maintenance
in his house for his wife, and she has entered into the
house of another, and has borne him children, if in the future her
[first] husband shall return and regain his city, that woman shall
return to her first husband, but the children shall follow their own
father.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Right of a deserted wife to remarry</note>
§ 136. If a man has left his city and fled, and, after he has gone,
his wife has entered into the house of another; if the man return
and seize his wife, the wife of the fugitive shall not return to her
husband, because he hated his city and fled.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of a divorced woman who has borne children</note>
§ 137. If a man has determined to divorce a concubine who has
borne him children, or a votary who has granted him children, he
shall return to that woman her marriage-portion, and shall give her
the usufruct of field, garden, and goods, to bring up her children.
After her children have grown up, out of whatever is given to her
children, they shall give her one son's share, and the husband of her
choice shall marry her.
</p>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of a divorced woman who
is childless</note>
§ 138. If a man has divorced his wife, who has not borne him
children, he shall pay over to her as much money as was given for
her bride-price and the marriage-portion which she brought from
her father's house, and so shall divorce her.
</p>

<p>
§ 139. If there was no bride-price, he shall give her one mina of
silver, as a price of divorce.
</p>

<p>
§ 140. If he be a plebeian, he shall give her one-third of a mina
of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Status of a worthless wife</note>
§ 141. If a man's wife, living in her husband's house, has persisted
in going out, has acted the fool, has wasted her house, has belittled
her husband, he shall prosecute her. If her husband has said, <q>I
divorce her,</q> she shall go her way; he shall give her nothing as her
price of divorce. If her husband has said, <q>I will not divorce her,</q>
he may take another woman to wife; the wife shall live as a slave in
her husband's house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Status of a wife who repudiates her husband</note>
§ 142. If a woman has hated her husband and has said, <q>You
shall not possess me,</q> her past shall be inquired into, as to what
she lacks. If she has been discreet, and has no vice, and her husband
has gone out, and has greatly belittled her, that woman has no
blame, she shall take her marriage-portion and go off to her father's
house.
</p>

<p>
§ 143. If she has not been discreet, has gone out, ruined her
house, belittled her husband, she shall be drowned.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marriage with a votary</note>
§ 144. If a man has married a votary, and that votary has given
a maid to her husband, and so caused him to have children, and, if
that man is inclined to marry a concubine, that man shall not be allowed
to do so, he shall not marry a concubine.
</p>

<p>
§ 145. If a man has married a votary, and she has not granted
him children, and he is determined to marry a concubine, that
man shall marry the concubine, and bring her into his house,
but the concubine shall not place herself on an equality with the
votary.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A votary's rights against a maid assigned
to her husband</note>
§ 146. If a man has married a votary, and she has given a maid
to her husband, and the maid has borne children, and if afterward
that maid has placed herself on an equality with her mistress, because
she has borne children, her mistress shall not sell her, she
shall place a slave-mark upon her, and reckon her with the slave-girls.
</p>

<p>
§ 147. If she has not borne children, her mistress shall sell her.
</p>

<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Status of a wife afflicted with a disease</note>
§ 148. If a man has married a wife and a disease has seized her,
if he is determined to marry a second wife, he shall marry her. He
shall not divorce the wife whom the disease has seized. In the home
they made together she shall dwell, and he shall maintain her as
long as she lives.
</p>

<p>
§ 149. If that woman was not pleased to stay in her husband's
house, he shall pay over to her the marriage-portion which she
brought from her father's house, and she shall go away.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wife's right to property deeded to
her by her husband</note>
§ 150. If a man has presented field, garden, house, or goods to
his wife, has granted her a deed of gift, her children, after her husband's
death, shall not dispute her right; the mother shall leave it
after her death to that one of her children whom she loves best.
She shall not leave it to her kindred.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marital responsibility for ante-nuptial debts</note>
§ 151. If a woman, who is living in a man's house, has persuaded
her husband to bind himself, and grant her a deed to the effect that
she shall not be held for debt by a creditor of her husband's; if that
man had a debt upon him before he married that woman, his creditor
shall not take his wife for it. Also, if that woman had a debt
upon her before she entered that man's house, her creditor shall not
take her husband for it.
</p>

<p>
§ 152. From the time that that woman entered into the man's
house they together shall be liable for all debts subsequently incurred.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Connivance at husband's murder by a wife</note>
§ 153. If a man's wife, for the sake of another, has caused her
husband to be killed, that woman shall be impaled.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Incest with own daughter</note>
§ 154. If a man has committed incest with his daughter, that
man shall be banished from the city.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Incest with daughter-in-law</note>
§ 155. If a man has betrothed a maiden to his son and his son has
known her, and afterward the man has lain in her bosom, and been
caught, that man shall be strangled and she shall be cast into the
water.
</p>

<p>
§ 156. If a man has betrothed a maiden to his son, and his son has
not known her, and that man has lain in her bosom, he shall pay her
half a mina of silver, and shall pay over to her whatever she brought
from her father's house, and the husband of her choice shall marry her.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Incest with mother</note>
§ 157. If a man, after his father's death, has lain in the bosom of
his mother, they shall both of them be burnt together.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Incest with step-mother</note>
§ 158. If a man, after his father's death, be caught in the bosom
of his step-mother, who has borne children, that man shall be cut off
from his father's house.
</p>

<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalty for breach of promise</note>
§ 159. If a man, who has presented a gift to the house of his prospective
father-in-law and has given the bride-price, has afterward
looked upon another woman and has said to his father-in-law, <q>I will
not marry your daughter</q>; the father of the girl shall keep whatever
he has brought as a present.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of a rejected suitor</note>
§ 160. If a man has presented a gift to the house of his prospective
father-in-law, and has given the bride-price, but the father of
the girl has said, <q>I will not give you my daughter,</q> the father
shall return double all that was presented him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Slandering rival not to profit by his calumny</note>
§ 161. If a man has brought a gift to the house of his prospective
father-in-law, and has given the bride-price, but his comrade has
slandered him and his father-in-law has said to the suitor, <q>You
shall not marry my daughter,</q> [the father] shall return double all
that was presented him. Further, the comrade shall not marry the
girl.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disposal of a wife's marriage-portion</note>
§ 162. If a man has married a wife, and she has borne him children,
and that woman has gone to her fate, her father shall lay no
claim to her marriage-portion. Her marriage-portion is her children's
only.
</p>

<p>
§ 163. If a man has married a wife, and she has not borne him
children, and that woman has gone to her fate; if his father-in-law
has returned to him the bride-price, which that man brought into
the house of his father-in-law, her husband shall have no claim on
the marriage-portion of that woman. Her marriage-portion indeed
belongs to her father's house.
</p>

<p>
§ 164. If the father-in-law has not returned the bride-price, the
husband shall deduct the amount of her bride-price from her marriage-portion,
and shall return her marriage-portion to her father's house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effect upon the inheritance of a father's
gift to a favorite son</note>
§ 165. If a man has presented field, garden, or house to his son,
the first in his eyes, and has written him a deed of gift; after the
father has gone to his fate, when the brothers share, he shall keep the
present his father gave him, and over and above shall share equally
with them in the goods of his father's estate.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reservation of a bride-price for a young unmarried
brother</note>
§ 166. If a man has taken wives for the other sons he had, but
has not taken a wife for his young son, after the father has gone to
his fate, when the brothers share, they shall set aside from the goods
of their father's estate money, as a bride-price, for their young
brother, who has not married a wife, over and above his share, and
they shall cause him to take a wife.
</p>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inheritance of children in case of two fruitful marriages</note>
§ 167. If a man has taken a wife, and she has borne him children
and that woman has gone to her fate, and he has taken a second wife,
and she also has borne children; after the father has gone to his fate,
the sons shall not share according to mothers, but each family shall
take the marriage-portion of its mother, and all shall share the
goods of their father's estate equally.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disinheritance of a son</note>
§ 168. If a man has determined to disinherit his son and has declared
before the judge, <q>I cut off my son,</q> the judge shall inquire
into the son's past, and, if the son has not committed a grave misdemeanor
such as should cut him off from sonship, the father shall disinherit
his son.
</p>

<p>
§ 169. If he has committed a grave crime against his father, which
cuts off from sonship, for the first offence he shall pardon him. If he
has committed a grave crime a second time, the father shall cut off
his son from sonship.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Status of children by a slave-woman</note>
§ 170. If a man has had children borne to him by his wife, and
also by a maid, if the father in his lifetime has said, <q>My sons,</q> to
the children whom his maid bore him, and has reckoned them with
the sons of his wife; then after the father has gone to his fate, the
children of the wife and of the maid shall share equally. The children
of the wife shall apportion the shares and make their own
selections.
</p>

<p>
§ 171. And if the father, in his lifetime, has not said, <q>My
sons,</q> to the children whom the maid bore him, after the father has
gone to his fate, the children of the maid shall not share with the
children of the wife in the goods of their father's house. The maid
and her children, however, shall obtain their freedom. The children
of the wife have no claim for service on the children of the maid.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rights of a widow in personal property</note>
The wife shall take her marriage-portion, and any gift that her
husband has given her and for which he has written a deed of gift
and she shall dwell in her husband's house; as long as she lives, she
shall enjoy it, she shall not sell it. After her death it is indeed her
children's.
</p>

<p>
§ 172. If her husband has not given her a gift, her marriage-portion
shall be given her in full, and, from the goods of her husband's
estate, she shall take a share equal to that of one son.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Her rights in the home</note>
If her children have persecuted her in order to have her leave the
house, and the judge has inquired into her past, and laid the blame
on the children, that woman shall not leave her husband's house. If
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
that woman has determined to leave, she shall relinquish to her
children the gift her husband gave her, she shall take the marriage-portion
of her father's estate, and the husband of her choice may
marry her.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dower rights of her children by second marriage</note>
§ 173. If that woman, where she has gone, has borne children to
her later husband, after that woman has died, the children of both
marriages shall share her marriage-portion.
</p>

<p>
§ 174. If she has not borne children to her later husband, the
children of her first husband shall take her marriage-portion.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Property rights of the children of slave-father
and free mother</note>
§ 175. If either a slave of a patrician, or of a plebeian, has
married the daughter of a free man, and she has borne children, the
owner of the slave shall have no claim for service on the children of
a free woman. And if a slave, either of a patrician or of a plebeian,
has married a free woman and when he married her she entered the
slave's house with a marriage-portion from her father's estate, be he
slave of a patrician or of a plebeian, and from the time that they
started to keep house, they have acquired property; after the slave,
whether of a patrician or of a plebeian, has gone to his fate, the free
woman shall take her marriage-portion, and whatever her husband
and she acquired, since they started house-keeping. She shall divide
it into two portions. The master of the slave shall take one half,
the other half the free woman shall take for her children.
</p>

<p>
§ 176. If the free woman had no marriage-portion, whatever her
husband and she acquired since they started house-keeping he shall
divide into two portions. The owner of the slave shall take one half,
the other half the free woman shall take for her children.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Property rights of the young children of a
widow who remarries</note>
§ 177. If a widow, whose children are young, has determined to
marry again, she shall not marry without consent of the judge.
When she is allowed to remarry, the judge shall inquire as to what
remains of the property of her former husband, and shall intrust the
property of her former husband to that woman and her second husband.
He shall give them an inventory. They shall watch over the
property, and bring up the children. Not a utensil shall they sell.
A buyer of any utensil belonging to the widow's children shall lose
his money and shall return the article to its owners.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The property rights of a votary</note>
§ 178. If a female votary, or vowed woman, has had given her by
her father a portion, as for marriage, and he has written her a deed,
and in the deed which he has written her he has not written that
she may leave it as she pleases, and has not granted her all her
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
desire; after her father has gone to his fate, her brothers shall take
her field, or garden, and, according to the value of her share, shall
give her corn, oil, and wool, and shall content her heart. If they do
not give her corn, oil, and wool, according to the value of her share,
and do not satisfy her, she shall let her field and garden to a
farmer, whom she chooses, and the farmer shall support her. The
field, garden, or whatever her father gave her, she shall enjoy, as
long as she lives. She shall not sell it, nor mortgage it. The reversion
of her inheritance indeed belongs to her brothers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Her right to convey property</note>
§ 179. If a female votary, or vowed woman, has had a portion
given her by her father, and he has written her a deed, and in the
deed that he has written her has [declared] that she may give it
as she pleases, and has granted her all her desire; after her father
has gone to his fate, she shall leave it as she pleases; her brothers
shall make no claim against her.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Her right of inheritance</note>
§ 180. If the father has not given a portion to his daughter, who
is a female votary, or vowed woman; after her father has gone to his
fate, she shall share in the property of her father's house, like any
other child. As long as she lives, she shall enjoy her share; after
her, it indeed belongs to her brothers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Her proportion of her father's property</note>
§ 181. If a father has vowed his daughter to a god, as a
temple maid, or a virgin, and has given her no portion; after the
father has gone to his fate, she shall share in the property of
her father's estate, taking one-third of a child's share. She shall
enjoy her share, as long as she lives. After her, it belongs to her
brothers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Additional privileges of votary of Marduk of Babylon</note>
§ 182. If a father has not given a portion, as for marriage, to his
daughter, a votary of Marduk of Babylon, and has not written
her a deed; after her father has gone to his fate, she shall share with
her brothers from the goods of her father's estate, taking one-third
of a child's share. She shall not be subject to duty. The votary of
Marduk shall leave it after her to whom she pleases.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of a daughter by a concubine, if provided for by father
on marriage</note>
§ 183. If a father has given a portion, as for marriage, to his
daughter by a concubine, and has given her to a husband, and has
written her a deed; after her father has gone to his fate, she shall
not share in the goods of her father's house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>If not so provided for by father</note>
§ 184. If a man has not given a portion, as for marriage, to his
daughter by a concubine, and has not given her to a husband; after
her father has gone to his fate, her brothers shall present her with a
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
marriage-portion, according to the wealth of her father's estate, and
shall give her to a husband.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adoption of natural son</note>
§ 185. If a man has taken a young child, a natural son of his, to
be his son, and has brought him up, no one shall make a claim
against that foster child.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adoption of child of living parents</note>
§ 186. If a man has taken a young child to be his son, and after
he has taken him, the child discover his own parents, he shall return
to his father's house.
</p>

<p>
§ 187. The son of a royal favorite, of one that stands in the palace,
or the son of a votary shall not be reclaimed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibilities of a craftsman to his adopted child</note>
§§ 188, 189. If a craftsman has taken a child to bring up and has
taught him his handicraft, he shall not be reclaimed. If he has not
taught him his handicraft that foster child shall return to his father's
house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of inheritance of an adopted son</note>
§ 190. If a man has brought up the child, whom he has taken to
be his son, but has not reckoned him with his sons, that foster child
shall return to his father's house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Obligations on discarding an adopted son</note>
§ 191. If a man has brought up the child, whom he took to be
his son, and then sets up a home, and after he has acquired children,
decides to disinherit the foster child, that son shall not go his way
[penniless]; the father that brought him up shall give him one-third
of a son's share in his goods and he shall depart. He shall not give
him field, garden, or house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment for the repudiation of adoptive parents</note>
§ 192. If the son of a palace favorite or the son of a vowed woman
has said to the father that brought him up, <q>You are not my
father,</q> or to the mother that brought him up, <q>You are not my
mother,</q> his tongue shall be cut out.
</p>

<p>
§ 193. If the son of a palace favorite or the son of a vowed woman
has come to know his father's house and has hated his father that
brought him up, or his mother that brought him up, and shall go
off to his father's house, his eyes shall be torn out.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalty of substituting one infant for another</note>
§ 194. If a man has given his son to a wet-nurse to suckle,
and that son has died in the hands of the nurse, and the nurse,
without consent of the child's father or mother, has nursed another
child, they shall prosecute her; because she has nursed another
child, without consent of the father or mother, her breasts shall be
cut off.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assault on a father</note>
§ 195. If a son has struck his father, his hands shall be cut
off.
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Graded penalties for assault and battery</note>
§ 196. If a man has knocked out the eye of a patrician, his eye
shall be knocked out.
</p>

<p>
§ 197. If he has broken the limb of a patrician, his limb shall be
broken.
</p>

<p>
§ 198. If he has knocked out the eye of a plebeian or has broken
the limb of a plebeian, he shall pay one mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 199. If he has knocked out the eye of a patrician's servant,
or broken the limb of a patrician's servant, he shall pay half his
value.
</p>

<p>
§ 200. If a patrician has knocked out the tooth of a man that is
his equal, his tooth shall be knocked out.
</p>

<p>
§ 201. If he has knocked out the tooth of a plebeian, he shall
pay one-third of a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Brutal assault</note>
§ 202. If a man has smitten the privates of a man, higher in rank
than he, he shall be scourged with sixty blows of an ox-hide scourge,
in the assembly.
</p>

<p>
§ 203. If a man has smitten the privates of a patrician of his
own rank, he shall pay one mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 204. If a plebeian has smitten the privates of a plebeian, he
shall pay ten shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 205. If the slave of anyone has smitten the privates of a free-born
man, his ear shall be cut off.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fatal assault</note>
§ 206. If a man has struck another in a quarrel, and caused him
a permanent injury, that man shall swear, <q>I struck him without
malice,</q> and shall pay the doctor.
</p>

<p>
§ 207. If he has died of his blows, [the man] shall swear [similarly],
and pay one-half a mina of silver; or,
</p>

<p>
§ 208. If [the deceased] was a plebeian, he shall pay one-third of
a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assaults upon pregnant women</note>
§ 209. If a man has struck a free woman with child, and has
caused her to miscarry, he shall pay ten shekels for her miscarriage.
</p>

<p>
§ 210. If that woman die, his daughter shall be killed.
</p>

<p>
§ 211. If it be the daughter of a plebeian, that has miscarried
through his blows, he shall pay five shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 212. If that woman die, he shall pay half a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 213. If he has struck a man's maid and caused her to miscarry,
he shall pay two shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 214. If that woman die, he shall pay one-third of a mina of
silver.
</p>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Gradation of surgeon's fees</note>
§ 215. If a surgeon has operated with the bronze lancet on a
patrician for a serious injury, and has cured him, or has removed
with a bronze lancet a cataract for a patrician, and has cured his
eye, he shall take ten shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 216. If it be plebeian, he shall take five shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 217. If it be a man's slave, the owner of the slave shall give two
shekels of silver to the surgeon.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalties for unskilful operations</note>
§ 218. If a surgeon has operated with the bronze lancet on a
patrician for a serious injury, and has caused his death, or has removed
a cataract for a patrician, with the bronze lancet, and has
made him lose his eye, his hands shall be cut off.
</p>

<p>
§ 219. If the surgeon has treated a serious injury of a plebeian's
slave, with the bronze lancet, and has caused his death, he shall
render slave for slave.
</p>

<p>
§ 220. If he has removed a cataract with the bronze lancet, and
made the slave lose his eye, he shall pay half his value.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cure of limb or bowel</note>
§ 221. If a surgeon has cured the limb of a patrician, or has
doctored a diseased bowel, the patient shall pay five shekels of silver
to the surgeon.
</p>

<p>
§ 222. If he be a plebeian, he shall pay three shekels of
silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 223. If he be a man's slave, the owner of the slave shall give
two shekels of silver to the doctor.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fees for the treatment of the diseases of animals</note>
§ 224. If a veterinary surgeon has treated an ox, or an ass, for a
severe injury, and cured it, the owner of the ox, or the ass, shall pay
the surgeon one-sixth of a shekel of silver, as his fee.
</p>

<p>
§ 225. If he has treated an ox, or an ass, for a severe injury, and
caused it to die, he shall pay one-quarter of its value to the owner
of the ox, or the ass.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Brander's liabilities</note>
§ 226. If a brander has cut out a mark on a slave, without
the consent of his owner, that brander shall have his hands
cut off.
</p>

<p>
§ 227. If someone has deceived the brander, and induced him to
cut out a mark on a slave, that man shall be put to death and
buried in his house; the brander shall swear, <q>I did not mark him
knowingly,</q> and shall go free.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Builder's fee and liabilities for bad workmanship</note>
§ 228. If a builder has built a house for a man, and finished it,
he shall pay him a fee of two shekels of silver, for each <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>
built on.
</p>

<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<p>
§ 229. If a builder has built a house for a man, and has not made
his work sound, and the house he built has fallen, and caused the
death of its owner, that builder shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
§ 230. If it is the owner's son that is killed, the builder's son
shall be put to death.
</p>

<p>
§ 231. If it is the slave of the owner that is killed, the builder
shall give slave for slave to the owner of the house.
</p>

<p>
§ 232. If he has caused the loss of goods, he shall render back
whatever he has destroyed. Moreover, because he did not make
sound the house he built, and it fell, at his own cost he shall rebuild
the house that fell.
</p>

<p>
§ 233. If a builder has built a house for a man, and has not
keyed his work, and the wall has fallen, that builder shall make
that wall firm at his own expense.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Boatmen's fees and liabilities</note>
§ 234. If a boatman has built a boat of sixty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> for a man, he
shall pay him a fee of two shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 235. If a boatman has built a boat for a man, and has not made
his work sound, and in that same year that boat is sent on a voyage
and suffers damage, the boatman shall rebuild that boat, and, at his
own expense, shall make it strong, or shall give a strong boat to
the owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hire of boats</note>
§ 236. If a man has let his boat to a boatman, and the boatman
has been careless and the boat has been sunk or lost, the boatman
shall restore a boat to the owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility of boatmen carrying goods</note>
§ 237. If a man has hired a boat and boatman, and loaded it with
corn, wool, oil, or dates, or whatever it be, and the boatman has been
careless, and sunk the boat, or lost what is in it, the boatman shall
restore the boat which he sank, and whatever he lost that was in it.
</p>

<p>
§ 238. If a boatman has sunk a man's boat, and has floated it
again, he shall pay half its value in silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 239. If a man has hired a boatman, he shall pay him six <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>
of corn yearly.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Law of collision</note>
§ 240. If a boat, on its course, has run into a boat at anchor, and
sunk it, the owner of the boat that was sunk shall estimate on oath
whatever was lost in his boat, and the owner of the moving vessel,
which sank the boat at anchor, shall make good his boat and what
was lost in it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Working ox not to be distrained</note>
§ 241. If a man has levied a distraint on a working ox, he shall
pay one-third of a mina of silver.
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'> Hire of oxen and cows</note>
§ 242. If a man has hired a working ox for one year, its hire is
four <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn.
</p>

<p>
§ 243. As the hire of a milch cow one shall give three <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of
corn to its owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Liability for loss of ox or ass by accident</note>
§ 244. If a man has hired an ox, or an ass, and a lion has killed
it in the open field, the loss falls on its owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Compensation for loss of ox by ill-treatment</note>
§ 245. If a man has hired an ox and has caused its death, by carelessness,
or blows, he shall restore ox for ox, to the owner of the ox.
</p>

<p>
§ 246. If a man has hired an ox, and has broken its leg, or cut its
neck (?), he shall restore ox for ox, to the owner of the ox.
</p>

<p>
§ 247. If a man has hired an ox, and knocked out its eye, he shall
pay to the owner of the ox half its value.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility for unavoidable accidents to a hired ox</note>
§ 248. If a man has hired an ox, and has broken its horn, cut off
its tail, or torn its muzzle, he shall pay one-quarter of its value.
</p>

<p>
§ 249. If a man has hired an ox, and God has struck it, and it has
died, the man that hired the ox shall make affidavit and go free.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Death by goring, accidental</note>
§ 250. If a bull has gone wild and gored a man, and caused his
death, there can be no suit against the owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility for a vicious ox</note>
§ 251. If a man's ox be a gorer, and has revealed its evil propensity
as a gorer, and he has not blunted its horn, or shut up the ox,
and then that ox has gored a free man, and caused his death, the
owner shall pay half a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
§ 252. If it be a slave that has been killed, he shall pay one-third
of a mina of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibility of a tenant farmer</note>
§ 253. If a man has set another over his field, hired him, allotted
him tools, and intrusted him with oxen for cultivating the field and
provided harnesses for them, and if that man has appropriated the
seed or provender, and they have been found in his possession, his
hands shall be cut off.
</p>

<p>
§ 254. If he has taken the provender or rations and has enfeebled
the oxen, he shall make it good from the corn he has hoed.
</p>

<p>
§ 255. If he has let out the man's oxen for hire, or stolen the
seed-corn, or has not produced a crop, that man shall be prosecuted,
and he shall pay sixty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn for each
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>.
</p>

<p>
§ 256. If he is not able to pay his compensation, he shall be torn
in pieces on that field by the oxen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wages of laborers</note>
§ 257. If a man has hired a field-laborer, he shall pay him eight
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn yearly.
</p>

<p>
§ 258. If anyone has hired an ox-herd he shall pay him six <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>
of corn yearly.
</p>

<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theft of agricultural instruments</note>
§ 259. If a man has stolen a watering-machine from the meadow,
he shall pay five shekels of silver to the owner of the watering-machine.
</p>

<p>
§ 260. If a man has stolen a <foreign rend='italic'>shadduf</foreign>,
or a plough, he shall pay three shekels of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wages of herdsmen</note>
§ 261. If a man has hired a herdsman, to pasture oxen, or sheep,
he shall pay him <hi rend='italic'>eight GUR</hi> of corn yearly.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their liability</note>
§ 262. If a man has intrusted ox or ass to ... [Passage
mutilated.]
</p>

<p>
§ 263. If he has lost the ox, or ass, given to him, he shall restore
ox for ox, and ass for ass to its owner.
</p>

<p>
§ 264. If a herdsman, who has had oxen or sheep given to
him to pasture, has received his wages for the business, and
been satisfied, then diminish the herd or lessen the offspring, he
shall give increase and produce according to the nature of his
agreements.
</p>

<p>
§ 265. If a herdsman, to whom oxen or sheep have been given,
has defaulted, has altered the price, or sold them, he shall be prosecuted,
and shall restore oxen, or sheep, tenfold, to their owner.
</p>

<p>
§ 266. If lightning has struck a fold, or a lion has made a
slaughter, the herdsman shall purge himself by oath, and the owner
of the fold shall bear the loss of the fold.
</p>

<p>
§ 267. If the herdsman has been careless, and a loss has occurred
in the fold, the herdsman shall make good the loss in the fold; he
shall repay the oxen, or sheep, to their owner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hire of animals for threshing</note>
§ 268. If a man has hired an ox, for threshing, its hire is twenty
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of corn.
</p>

<p>
§ 269. If he has hired an ass, for threshing, its hire is ten <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of
corn.
</p>

<p>
§ 270. If he has hired a young animal, for threshing, its hire is
one <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of corn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hire of wagon, oxen, and driver</note>
§ 271. If a man has hired oxen, a wagon, and its driver, he shall
pay one hundred and sixty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of corn daily.
</p>

<p>
§ 272. If a man has hired the wagon alone, he shall pay forty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>
of corn daily.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Graded wages of day-laborers</note>
§ 273. If a man has hired a laborer from the beginning of the
year to the fifth month, he shall pay six <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver daily; from
the sixth month to the close of the year, he shall pay five <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi>
of silver daily.
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wages of artisans</note>
§ 274. If a man has hired an artisan, he shall pay as his daily
wages, to a ... five <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver, to a potter five
<hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver, to a tailor five <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi>
of silver, to a stone-cutter ... <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver, to a ...
<hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver, to a ... <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver,
to a carpenter four <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver, to a rope-maker four
<hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver, to a ... <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of
silver, to a builder ... <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hires of various boats</note>
§ 275. If a man has hired a boat, its hire is three <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of silver
daily.
</p>

<p>
§ 276. If he has hired a fast boat he shall pay two and a half
<hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> daily.
</p>

<p>
§ 277. If a man has hired a ship of sixty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> he shall pay
one-sixth of a shekel of silver daily for its hire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Compensation for defect discovered in a slave after sale</note>
§ 278. If a man has bought a male or female slave and the slave
has not fulfilled his month, but the bennu disease has fallen upon
him, he shall return the slave to the seller and the buyer shall take
back the money he paid.
</p>

<p>
§ 279. If a man has bought a male or female slave and a claim
has been raised, the seller shall answer the claim.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Manumission of native slaves taken captive and
bought back by travelling merchant</note>
§ 280. If a man, in a foreign land, has bought a male, or female,
slave of another, and if when he has come home the owner of the
male or female slave has recognized his slave, and if the slave be a
native of the land, he shall grant him his liberty without money.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of foreign slaves</note>
§ 281. If the slave was a native of another country, the buyer
shall declare on oath the amount of money he paid, and the owner
of the slave shall repay the merchant what he paid and keep his slave.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment for repudiating a master</note>
§ 282. If a slave has said to his master, <q>You are not my master,</q>
he shall be brought to account as his slave, and his master shall
cut off his ear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General character of the Ḥammurabi Code</note>
This is not the place to write a commentary on the Code,
but there are a few necessary cautions. One of the first is
that most clauses are permissive rather than positive. The
verb <q>shall</q> is not an imperative, but a future. Doubtless
in case of heinous crimes the death-penalty had to be
inflicted. But there was always a trial, and proof was
demanded on oath. In many cases the <q>shall</q> is only
permissive, as when the Code says a widow <q>shall</q> marry
again. There is no proof that the jury decided only facts
and found the prisoner guilty or not, leaving the judge no
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
option but to inflict the extreme penalty. The judge, on
the contrary, seems to have had much legislative power.
When this view is taken, the Code appears no more severe
than those of the Middle Ages, or even of recent times, when
a man was hanged for sheep-stealing. There are many humanitarian
clauses and much protection is given the weak
and the helpless. One of the best proofs of its inherent
excellence is that it helped to build up an empire, which
lasted many centuries and was regarded with reverence
almost to the end.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Later Babylonian Law</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bibliography</note>
Very little is yet known regarding later Babylonian law.
Dr. F. E. Peiser published in the <hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte der
Königliche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin</hi> (1889,
pp. 823 ff.) a very interesting fragmentarily preserved text
(82-7-14, 988, in the British Museum), which contains
either a collection of abstracts of cases which have been
decided, or precedents, or else an extract from some code
later than that of Ḥammurabi. Dr. Peiser thought that
the date was the second year of Ashurbânipal, king of
Babylon. This seems rather unlikely, but may, of course,
be true.
</p>

<p>
In his inaugural dissertation, Dr. Peiser, under the title
of <hi rend='italic'>Jurisprudentiae Babylonicae quae supersunt</hi>, commented
upon and illustrated the above text by numerous examples
of cases, actually occurring during the period of the second
empire. But the whole collection of fragments of law with
which he had to deal was too small to do more than show
what may be hoped for as the result of future discoveries.
</p>

<p>
As specimens of these laws we may take the following:
</p>

<note place='margin'>Agent not able to recover without power of attorney</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law A. [Col. II. 4-14.]
</p>

<p>
The man who has sealed a tablet, by the name of another, in
favor of an owner of a field, or has sealed a bond, and has not
caused to be executed a deed giving him power of attorney, or has
not taken a duplicate of such a tablet [cannot take possession]; the
man, in whose name the tablet, or bond, is written, shall take that
field, or house.
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<p>
If a man acted as buyer, or lender, for another, he incurred
liabilities, for which he could not indemnify himself, unless
he had secured from his principal a deed empowering him
so to act. But, if without such power of attorney, A had
acted for B, and bought a house, or field, of C, and had
the conveyance made out to B, of course paying C; or had
lent money to C, in the name of B; and the transaction
had been completed, by sealing the deed of sale or bond;
then B was the owner of the field, or house, or the creditor
for the loan. A could not plead that he was the real owner,
even if he had not been able to recover the purchase-money
or loan from B, in whose name he had made it. B, whose
name appeared in the deed or in the bond, was the rightful
owner.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Responsibility of one who sells</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law B. [Col. II. 15-23.]
</p>

<p>
The man, who has sold a female slave and has had an objection
made concerning her, shall take her back. The seller shall give to
the buyer the price named in the deed of sale, to its exact amount,
and shall pay half a shekel of silver for each of the children born to
her.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
How long after sale objection could be raised is not
stated. In early times a month was allowed for fever to
develop; in Assyrian contracts a hundred days were allowed
for fever or seizure. But a <foreign rend='italic'>sartu</foreign>,
or <q>vice,</q> could be
pleaded, at any time, as ground for returning the slave.
Here it is clear that time was allowed for a slave to bear one
or more children, before the repudiation lost effect. It is
noteworthy that the seller had to buy back such children.
The maid may have been bought to bear her master children,
and if these were not sound, the master had ground for
complaint and could not be held responsible for them. Also
it was objectionable to separate mother and children. The
price named is trifling. Compare § 278 of the Code, where,
however, no mention is made of the children of a maid.
</p>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<p>
The next law is unintelligible at present, owing to the
<foreign rend='italic'>lacunae</foreign>, and doubtful readings of the text, which,
moreover, is only given in transcription. It appears to concern
a woman and her interests in a field or plantation and the
trees in it, and its produce.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Permanent settlements at marriage between
father of bride and the bridegroom</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law C. [Col. III. 3-15.]
</p>

<p>
A man has given his daughter to a freeborn man and the father
has fixed something in a deed and given to his son, and the first-named
has fixed a marriage-portion for his daughter and they have
mutually executed deeds of settlement. They shall not alter their
deeds. The father shall give in full the settlement
(<foreign rend='italic'>nuṣurru</foreign>), which
he had promised his son by deed, to the father-in-law, and deliver it.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The father here named appears to be the father of the
bridegroom. He must make a settlement on his son, as
well as the father of the bride on his daughter. The point
of the law seems to be that these settlements on the part of
the parents to the young couple are irrevocable. No subsequent
engagements entered into can affect them. This settlement
by the bridegroom's father on his son, which he has
to pay over to the bride's father, evidently takes the place
of the <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign>,
or <q>bride-price</q> of the Code. The obligation
of a father to find his son the means for a bride-price appears
in the Code, § 166; but there is no section which
answers directly to this law. The marriage-portion is now
<foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign>,
in the Code it was <foreign rend='italic'>šeriktu</foreign>,
while <foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign> was the
husband's gift to the wife.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Inheritance rights of children of second marriage</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law D. [Col. III. 16-22.]
</p>

<p>
When the father [of the bridegroom] has had his wife taken away
by fate, has taken to himself a second wife, and she has borne him
sons, the sons of the second wife shall take a third of his property
remaining.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
This appears as part of the same section as Law C, and
is enacted again in Law K, page 69. It is not easy to see
why it is here, except to make plain that settlements on
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
marriages of the sons of the first family are a first charge on
the father's property. The second family takes a third, not
of all the father once had, but of what is left after these
gifts by deed have been taken out. The married sons of
the first family are not disinherited by virtue of these gifts,
but take among them two-thirds of what is left. This
is against the Code, § 167.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Procedure in case the father-in-law is unable
to carry out his promise of dowry</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law E. [Col. III. 23-31.]
</p>

<p>
A man who has promised a marriage-portion to his daughter, or
has written her a deed of gift, and afterward his means have diminished,
shall give to his daughter a marriage-portion according to his
means that are left. Father-in-law and son-in-law shall not quarrel
one with the other.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Dr. Peiser has shown that the marriage-portion was often
held back a long time. Suits were brought to recover it
from fathers-in-law. There is no corresponding section in
the Code.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Marriage-portion of childless wife</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law F. [Col. III. 32-37.]
</p>

<p>
A man has given a marriage-portion to his daughter and she has
neither son nor daughter and fate has carried her off; her marriage-portion
returns to her father's house.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Exactly as in the Code, § 163.
</p>

<p>
The first seven lines of Col. IV. are too fragmentary to
give a connected sense, but are still concerned with the marriage-portion.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Rights of inheritance of a childless widow</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law G. [Col. IV. 8-24.]
</p>

<p>
A wife, whose marriage-portion her husband has received, who has
no son or daughter, and fate has carried off her husband, shall be
given from her husband's property the marriage-portion, whatever
that was. If her husband has made her a gift, she shall receive the
gift of her husband with her marriage-portion and take it away. If
she had no marriage-portion, the judge shall estimate the property
of her husband and, according to her husband's means, shall grant her
something.
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<p>
It is noteworthy that in the above laws the old usage is
reversed. Now the <foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign> is the marriage-portion, given
with the bride, and the <foreign rend='italic'>šeriktu</foreign> is the husband's
assignment to the wife. With this alteration the law agrees with the
Code, § 171. But there she has a family.
</p>

<note place='margin'>The rights of a widow with children in case of re-marriage</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law H. [Col. IV. 25-45.]
</p>

<p>
A man has married a wife and she has borne him children; after
that man has been carried off by fate, and that woman has set her
face to enter the house of another, she shall take the marriage-portion
which she brought from her father's house, and whatever her
husband presented her as a gift, and shall marry the husband of her
choice. As long as she lives, she shall enjoy food and drink from them.
If there be children of this husband, they and the children of the
former husband shall share her marriage-portion. The sisters....
</p>
</quote>

<p>
This is practically the same as Code, § 170, but it is differently
arranged and the phrases differ markedly. Note
that the sisters were separately treated.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Division of the estate of a man twice married</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Law K. [Col. V. 33-46.]
</p>

<p>
A man has married a wife and she has borne him children, and
fate has carried off his wife; he has married a second wife and she has
borne him children; after the father has gone to his fate, the children
of the former wife shall take two-thirds of the goods of their
father's house, the children of the second wife shall take one-third.
Their sisters who are dwelling in their father's house....
</p>
</quote>

<p>
This must be contrasted with § 167 of the Code. There
all sons share equally. Here the first family take two-thirds.
The sisters were also treated separately. It is clear
that we have to do with a code which preserves many features
of the early times, but has many new features of its
own. It is greatly to be desired that further portions should
be published.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Social Organization Of The Ancient Babylonian State</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The three great classes of the population: the
gentry, the common men, and the slaves</note>
The State appears in the light of the Ḥammurabi Code
to have been composed of three great classes, the <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign>,
the <foreign rend='italic'>muškênu</foreign>, and the
<foreign rend='italic'>ardu</foreign>. To the first class belonged
the king and the chief officers of state, and also the landed
proprietors. Their liabilities for fines and punishments
were higher. Also in their case the old law of <q>eye for
eye, tooth for tooth</q> still held; while others came under a
scale of compensations and damages. This may point to a
racial difference. The ancient laws of Arabia may have
been carried with them by Ḥammurabi's tribal followers,
while the older subject-residents accepted the more commercial
system of fines. The old pride of the Arab tribesman
may have forbidden his taking money as payment for
his damaged eye, or tooth. But the <foreign rend='italic'>muškênu</foreign> was more
<q>humble,</q> as his name denotes, and may well have formed
the bulk of the subject-population. He was a free man,
not a beggar. He was not without considerable means, as
we see from the sections referring to theft from him. He
had slaves,<note place='foot'>§ 15.</note> and seems to have been liable to conscription.
His fees to a doctor or surgeon were less than those paid
by an <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign>. He paid less to his wife for a
divorce,<note place='foot'>§ 140.</note> and
could assault another poor man more cheaply than could
an <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign>. There can be no doubt that the
<foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign> was the
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
<q>gentleman</q> or <q>nobleman,</q> and the <foreign rend='italic'>muškênu</foreign>
a common man, or poor man. But the exact force of the terms is uncertain.
</p>

<p>
In process of time <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign> came to be used, like our
<q>sir,</q> and even <q>esquire,</q> of those who had no special qualifications
for the title. Like the <q>gentleman's gentleman</q> of
the servant's hall, he was only a respectable person. So, even
in the Code, <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign> usually means no more than
<q>man.</q> It already appears as a mere determinative of personality in
the titles of laborers and artisans,<note place='foot'>§§ 273, 274.</note> when it cannot
stamp them as landed proprietors. But it may mark them as
members of the guilds of craftsmen and recall the respect
due to such. If, however, we press this, we must admit a
guild of day laborers.
</p>

<p>
There is no suggestion of any legal disability on the part
of a <foreign rend='italic'>muškênu</foreign>; he is merely a person of less
consideration. Whether or not his ranks were recruited from the children
of slaves by free parents is not clear, but it is very probable
that they were.
</p>

<p>
The slave was at his master's command and, like a child
in his father's house, to some extent a chattel. He could
be pledged for debt, as could a wife or child. He was
subject to the levy,<note place='foot'>§ 16.</note> and his lot was so far unpleasant that
we hear much of runaway slaves. It was penal to harbor
a slave, or to keep one caught as a fugitive.<note place='foot'>§§ 16, 17, 19.</note> Any
injury done to him was paid for, and his master received the
damages.<note place='foot'>§ 199.</note> But he was free to marry a free woman and the
children were free. So a slave-girl was free on her master's
death, if she had borne him children; and the children
were also free. He was subject to mutilation for assaulting
a free man, or repudiating his master.<note place='foot'>§§ 205, 282.</note> But his
master had to pay for his cure, if sick.<note place='foot'>§§ 218, 223.</note> He was
not free to contract, except by deed and bond.<note place='foot'>§ 6.</note> Yet he
and his free wife
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
could acquire property, half of which would fall to his
wife and children on his death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The levy-master and the warrant-officer</note>
The Code reveals the existence of a class of men, who
were indeed known from the letters of Ḥammurabi and the
contemporary contracts, but whose functions are not easy
to fix. They were the <foreign rend='italic'>rîd ṣâbî</foreign>
and the <foreign rend='italic'>bâ´iru</foreign>. By their
etymology these titles seemed to mean <q>slave-driver,</q> and
<q>catcher.</q> But the Code sets them in a clearer light. They
were closely connected, if not identical, officials. They had
charge of the levy, the local quota for the army, or for public
works. Hence <q>levy-master</q> and <q>warrant-officer</q> are
suggestive renderings. For the former official, <q>taskmaster,</q>
the one over the gang of forced laborers and reminiscent of
the old time press-gang officers, is a fair translation. <q>Field
cornet</q> would perhaps suit the military side. For some
aspects of their office the ancient <q>reeve</q> may be compared.
Whether the <q>catcher</q> actually was a local policeman,
whose chief duty was to apprehend criminals and reluctant
conscripts, is not yet clear. The same name is used of
<q>fishermen,</q> who were <q>catchers</q> in another sense, and of
hunters. A really satisfactory rendering is impossible, as
we have now no officials whose duties actually correspond
to theirs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their compensation</note>
Each of these officials held what may be called a benefice,
or perhaps a feoff. It consisted of land, house, and garden,
certain sheep and cattle as stock, and a salary. It was directly
ascribed to the king as benefactor. We may compare the
Norman lords settled in England by the Conqueror, or the
Roman soldier-colonists. The men may well have been the
followers of the first founder of the dynasty. In a very
similar way the Chaldean conqueror, Merodach-baladan II.,
long after, settled his Chaldean troops in Babylonia. We may
regard these men as retainers of the king, and probably as
originally foreigners. The benefice was held by them for
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
personal service. They were to go <q>on the king's errand</q>
when ordered. It was a penal offence to send a substitute.<note place='foot'>§ 26.</note>
The errand might take them away from home and detain
them a very long time. In such enforced absence the official
might delegate his son to take his place and carry on his
duty.<note place='foot'>§ 28.</note> This implies that there was a local duty besides the
personal service. Further, this needed a grown man to discharge
it.<note place='foot'>§ 29.</note> The <foreign rend='italic'>locum tenens</foreign>
enjoyed the benefice,<note place='foot'>§ 29.</note> with a
reserve of one-third for the wife to bring up the children
of the absent official. An official by neglecting the care
of his benefice ran the risk of forfeiture.<note place='foot'>§ 30.</note> This came
about by his absence giving the <foreign rend='italic'>locum tenens</foreign> opportunity
to acquire a prescriptive right, which he might do in three
years, if he showed himself a more worthy holder. But
this was only if the absentee had been neglectful, and a
one-year tenancy conferred no such right.<note place='foot'>§ 31.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The risks of public service</note>
The service on which the official might be engaged was
evidently military and had risks. It is not certain whether
the <foreign rend='italic'>dannatu</foreign><note place='foot'>§ 32.</note> is really a
<q>fortress,</q> or a <q>defeat.</q> The
word has both meanings. It does not really matter.
Either way the official is captured by the enemy of the
king. He was bound to pay for his own ransom, if he had
the means; or if not, his town must ransom him and, failing
that, the state. But he could not raise money on his
benefice. Moreover, while it could descend to his son, it
was inalienable. No diminution by bequest to his female
relatives, no sale of part of it, no mortgage on it, nor even
its exchange for other like estate, was allowed.
</p>

<p>
Further, the official and his benefice were protected. He
could not be hired out by his superior officers, nor in any
way plundered or oppressed. He held tax free, subject
only to his feudal duty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The tributary</note>
In some cases the tributary there is associated with these
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
two officials. No duty is set down for him, beyond that
implied in his name of paying a tribute. It is not clear
that all land was held on one or the other scheme, but it is
so in parts of the East still. Some land is held by personal
service, some on payment of a tax. This tax later became
the tithe. The personal service was later compounded for
by furnishing a soldier or two for the army. The liability
to serve in the levy continued to be borne by slaves and the
lower classes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>All land subject to royal taxation</note>
That all land did owe either personal service, or tax, is
probably to be deduced from § 40, where we read that
though a levy-master, warrant-officer, or tributary could
alienate nothing of their holdings, other land-owners could
do so. But they did so subject to the buyer taking over
the duty, or service, of the land so transferred. One of the
classes here named, the votary, appears subject to service
elsewhere. The votary of Marduk is expressly exempt
from this service.<note place='foot'>§ 183.</note> The merchant, who represents another
class, appears very often to have been a foreigner, only
temporarily resident in the country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The votaries</note>
The votary was already known to us from the contracts,
but there was little to fix her functions. As seen in the
Code, she was a highly favored person. Vowed to God,
usually to Shamash at Sippara, or Marduk at Babylon,
there seems little to connect her with the prostitute-votaries
of Ishtar at Erech. She ordinarily lived in the convent, or
<q>bride-house</q> of Shamash. She was given a portion,
exactly like a bride, on taking her vow and becoming the
<q>bride</q> of Shamash. But her property did not go to the
convent. At her father's death, with her consent, her estate
might be administered by her brothers, or she could
farm it out. At any rate, she was provided for during
her lifetime. But at her death, unless her father had specially
given her power to bequeath it, her property went
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
back to her family. She was not, however, doomed to
spend all her days in the convent. She could leave it and
even marry. But she was expected to maintain a high
standard of respectability. For her to open a beer-shop or
even enter one for drink was punished by burning. She
remained a virgin, even if married. She could have no
children and must provide her husband with a maid, if he
wished to have a family. But she was carefully guarded
from any reproach as childless. She ranks as a married
woman, even if unmarried, and is protected from slander.
Many noble ladies, and even kings' daughters, were votaries.<note place='foot'>For
fuller information and references, see A. J. S. L., XIX., pp. 98 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The merchant</note>
The merchant continually appears. Some passages suggest
that he was a state official. But this is really pressing
far the interest which the state took in him. He was,
doubtless, like the Jew of the Middle Ages, a valuable asset
to the king. He seems to have been the usual moneylender,
so much so that in many places <q>merchant</q> and
<q>creditor</q> are interchangeable. A man is usually said to
borrow of <q>his merchant,</q> as we say <q>of his banker.</q>
Doubtless, the king also borrowed from him. It is certain that
the Code was very lenient to him. But the merchant also
did business in the way of ordinary trade. As a capitalist
he sent out his travellers and agents with goods far and
wide, even into domains where the king's authority did not
reach. Much of the Code is occupied with regulating the
relations between the merchant and his agent. The agency
was that form of <hi rend='italic'>commenda</hi> which is so characteristic of the
East at the present. The agent takes stock or money
of his principal, signs for it, agrees to pay so much profit,
and goes off to seek a market, making what profit he can.
There is much to suggest that the merchant was not usually
a Babylonian. In later times, the Arameans were the
chief merchants, and travelled all over Mesopotamia, Palestine,
Syria, and into Asia Minor.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Judges, Law-Courts, And Legal Processes</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Antiquity of the judicial organization</note>
Partly because specific references to judges and legal
processes are not necessarily to be expected in historical inscriptions,
and partly because we do not really know which
are the earliest monuments of the race, it is impossible
to decide when law-courts first came into existence. It is
generally admitted, however, that the stele of Manistusu
is one of the earliest known monuments. There we read
of Galzu, a judge. There also we find many of the officials,
who later acted as judges upon occasion. Hence it may
fairly be said that judges were to be found in ancient
Babylonia from time immemorial. They must have decided
what was right when there was no written law to
which to appeal. With the judges were associated as assessors
the elders of the city. This was so marked a feature,
that in some cases we read, that after hearing the complaint
the judge <q>assembled the city</q> to hear the case. In Babylonia
the maxim, <foreign rend='italic'>littera scripta manet</foreign>, was so well understood
that hardly anything of importance was done without
committing it to writing. Hence we are as well informed
about domestic affairs in Babylonia as about those of
Europe in the Middle Ages.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sources of our knowledge of early legal procedure</note>
It seems best to consider legal usages first, because they
are essential to the understanding of all others. When
we have a simple contract between two parties we do not
at once see where the reference to the law comes in. But
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
the contract was not valid unless sealed and witnessed.
The sealing was accompanied by an oath. The oath probably
had to be made in court. The witnesses seem often
to have been a body of men who could only be found at
the court. Even when there is least trace of the law and
the judge, the case is similar to others where the judge appears
explicitly. It is also worthy of remark that, partly
owing to our possession of the Code and partly owing to
the fuller nature of the legal decisions, we know far more
of this subject, as of many others, in the early periods than
in the later. Hence the discussion of early legal usage is
unusually full. When the evidence from later times merely
supports this, it will not be noticed. Only divergences
are worthy of record. As a rule, the procedure changes
very little for many centuries.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Judges not often mentioned</note>
1. <hi rend='bold'>Judges.</hi> The references to judges are less numerous
than one would expect in the Code. But it seems probable
that the sentences there laid down had to be pronounced
by the judge, if not carried out by him. We are,
however, still in complete ignorance as to the machinery of
police administration. We may argue from analogy in
other countries and ages, but this is not a theoretical treatise
on comparative sociology. We must content ourselves with
direct evidence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their varied duties</note>
Some sections deal explicitly with the duties of a judge.
Thus,<note place='foot'>§ 5.</note> if a judge had given a judgment, decided the case,
and embodied it in a legal decision, he was subjected to
severe penalties for afterwards revoking his decision. If
he had inflicted a penalty, he had now to repay it twelvefold
to him from whom it was exacted. Further he was to
be publicly deposed from his office, expelled from his seat
of judgment, <foreign rend='italic'>kussû daianûtišu</foreign>, and no longer be permitted
to sit with the judges. It is, of course, assumed that when
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
he was called to account he could not justify his former
judgment, or else could not justify the change. But, as
the law reads, it seems simply calculated to render a judgment,
once pronounced, irrevocable,&mdash;at any rate, for that
judge. Probably its revocation, in the case of injustice,
was provided for by the right of appeal.
</p>

<p>
He had to consider the words of the witnesses, <foreign rend='italic'>amâtišunu
amâru</foreign>, literally, <q>to see their words,</q> perhaps implying that
the depositions were written, but there are instances where
<foreign rend='italic'>amâru</foreign> simply means <q>to
consider.</q><note place='foot'>§ 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
In a criminal case, where a man had to produce witnesses
to save his life from a death-sentence, the judge
might grant him six months' grace in which to produce his
witnesses.<note place='foot'>§ 13.</note> In later times we have many examples of
such a stay of process that evidence might be produced.<note place='foot'>§ 169.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Special directions to judges</note>
Special directions are also given to a judge as to his procedure,
when a father was minded to disinherit his son;
or, when a widow with a young family wished to marry
again.<note place='foot'>§ 177.</note> A slanderer was summoned before the
judge,<note place='foot'>§ 127.</note> a
son could not be cut off without referring the case to a
judge,<note place='foot'>§ 168.</note> the children who wished to turn their widowed
mother out of her house had to appear before a judge.<note place='foot'>§ 172.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Position, rank, and qualifications</note>
For the most part judges constituted a distinct profession,
but it must not be understood that they had no other
means of livelihood. Indeed, there is no hint anywhere
that they received any remuneration for their services. But
it was a high honor and by no means subsidiary to another
office. Among those who officiated as judges we find most
of the higher officials. Doubtless the king himself acted
as judge on occasions, and probably no great official of
the realm was wholly free from the call to act in a judicial
capacity. But, as a rule, the judge is simply noted as
<q>judge.</q> That the priests were judges is quite unproved.
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
The judges were men of great importance and high rank,
but there is nothing to show that they were priests. An
age qualification is more likely.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Method of appointment</note>
The judge was a professional man. We often find a man,
bearing the title <q>judge,</q> acting as party to a suit, or witness
to a deed, when he is certainly not acting in his judicial
capacity. To a certain extent he was a territorial officer,
had his own district for jurisdiction, and was jealous
of cases being taken elsewhere. How the ranks of the
judges were filled we do not know, but there is a hint of
royal appointment in the phrase, <q>the king's judges.</q> On
the other hand, there is clear evidence of the office being
hereditary. Thus, Ibik-Anunîtum had no less than three
sons, Idin-Ishtar, Marduk-mushallim, and Nannar-idinnam,
all judges. Whether a right to the office descended in the
female line is not quite clear, but we find a lady, Ishtar-ummu,
among the judges, on occasion. She was also the
scribe.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 327.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The chief-justice</note>
Though many high officials acted as judges, and so doing
are named before the simple <q>judge,</q> there is no evidence
of the existence of any <q>chief judge.</q> The order of names
appears to be that of seniority alone. This may be due to
the nature of our documents. The phrase-books name a
<q>chief judge</q> for Sumerian times. In the later Assyrian
period the chief-justice was called <foreign rend='italic'>sartênu</foreign>, evidently
because he fixed the <foreign rend='italic'>sartu</foreign>, or fine, on the condemned
party. Then also many high officials acted as judges.<note place='foot'>A. D. D. §
567.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The scribes</note>
2. <hi rend='bold'>Scribes.</hi>&mdash;The scribe exercised his craft as a profession.
One often meets with a scribe, <foreign rend='italic'>tupšarru</foreign>, acting in a
private capacity, as party to a suit, or as witness. He retains
the title even when the deed is drawn up by another writer.
The class was very numerous. Almost every document is
drawn up by a fresh scribe, so far as the scribe's name is
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
recorded, for he often omits his title. Generally he is the
last of the witnesses, but not always so.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their duties</note>
He wrote the whole of the document, including the
names of the witnesses. There is no evidence that anyone
else ever wrote a word on the document. As a rule, even
when the names of the fathers of the witnesses are given,
the scribe is content to write only his title after his name.
Hence we have no evidence whether the office was hereditary
or not.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Female scribes</note>
Women certainly were scribes. Out of a total of ninety
names of scribes known, at least ten were women. Here a
difficulty arises from the way in which women's names occur.
At this period proper names are usually written without
the determinative which marks sex. Nor do the names
decide, for both men and women bore the same name.
Thus Taribatum is the name of two men and also of two
women. Only when the title <foreign rend='italic'>tupšarru</foreign> is given, is the
feminine determinative prefixed to that. We have, however,
ten clear examples.
</p>

<p>
In the later times the scribe usually was a man, but female
scribes are known.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., 827, 2.</note> The Aramaic scribe is often
named, also the Egyptian. The scribe usually <q>held</q> the agreement,
which probably means that the parties were willing
to leave it in his safe-keeping.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The scribe not a judge</note>
The scribe was not a judge. It may be true that he
sometimes acted as judge or became one, but then the
higher office overshadowed the lower. He was no longer
scribe but judge. A judge may sometimes have written
down his legal decision and so acted as scribe, but we have
no evidence of such a case. The judge seems never to have
dispensed with the services of the scribe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The scribe not a priest</note>
The scribe was not a priest. There is no evidence whatever
that either priests were all scribes, or could all write,
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
or that scribes were necessarily priests. As a matter of fact,
the same man may have acted both as scribe and priest.
But the offices are distinct and no one man ever bears both
titles. That in later times the <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign> RID, whose title
can be read <foreign rend='italic'>šangû</foreign>, usually acts as scribe is due to the
peculiar nature of the documents. These concern transactions in
which the property of the temple, or of its officials, was in
question, and one of the college of priests attached to that
temple was charged with the duty of notary where temple
interests were concerned. One might as well say that
every clerk in the Middle Ages was a priest, because all
the deeds of the monastery with which we were dealing
were drawn up by Brother A, whose name was entered in
some monastery list of the brethren as a priest. Whether
the scribes were clerics, and always attached to some temple,
in minor orders, is not clear. On the whole, the evidence
is against this conclusion.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The witnesses</note>
3. <hi rend='bold'>Witnesses.</hi>&mdash;The word used to designate a witness is
<foreign rend='italic'>šîbu</foreign>, which denotes those who are <q>gray-headed,</q>
but it is not certain that it can have no other meaning. It may
mean those who were <q>present.</q> In actual use we can
distinguish three classes of persons to whom the term
<q>witness</q> can be applied.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The elders of a city</note>
First we have the elders, the <foreign rend='italic'>šîbu</foreign>, of a
city.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 80, B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
199, B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2458.</note> Possibly
the Kar-sippar, by which some men swore, or in presence
of which a contract was drawn up, were these elders of
Sippar. They formed the <foreign rend='italic'>puḫru</foreign>, or <q>assembly,</q> in
whose presence a man was scourged,<note place='foot'>§ 202.</note> from which a
prevaricating judge was expelled.<note place='foot'>§ 5.</note> They may have been
nominated, or at least approved, by the king; for we read of
<foreign rend='italic'>šîbê šarri</foreign>. They were not exclusively men, for we have
<foreign rend='italic'>šîbê û
šîbatu</foreign>.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2182.</note>
The recurrence of the same names, at the same dates, indicates
that a body of official witnesses were held in readiness
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
to act on such occasions. Many of them were temple
officials, or members of the guild of Shamash votaries.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their jury duties</note>
Sometimes they are associated with the judges in such a
way as to show that they were assessors.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 80.</note> They
included judges sometimes, at any rate <q>this witness</q> is attached to a
list of names which included a <foreign rend='italic'>nâgiru</foreign> of Babylon, a
judge, and other high
officials.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 824, 838.</note>
In the time of Nûr-Adadi they sent a case before the king.<note place='foot'>B 34.</note>
They actually gave judgment.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
99.</note> We may regard them as a jury, especially a grand
jury, qualified by their own knowledge to understand the
rights of the case and to judge of evidence. The judge
gave the sentence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Trial witnesses</note>
Secondly, we may distinguish the witnesses examined on
oath. It is not clear that these were called by the same
name. In the Code we read of <foreign rend='italic'>šîbi mûdi</foreign>, <q>the witnesses
that know,</q> who seem to resemble very closely the Greek
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Histores</foreign>.
These, of course, were usually not on the jury. They
testified, and were chosen by the parties to the suit. But
the judge might examine persons who, in his opinion,
would know. He selected and sent for them, directing the
parties whom to produce. He might even adjourn the case
for the production of witnesses.<note place='foot'>§ 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Witnesses to deeds</note>
Thirdly, we may distinguish the witnesses to a document.
Very often we can discern that these had an interest in the
case. They might be relatives of the parties, neighbors of
the estate in question, officials whose rights were concerned.
In later times they received the special name of <foreign rend='italic'>mukinnu</foreign>,
<q>the establishers.</q> They may be presumed to have known
at least the general purport of the deed which they witnessed.
When the deed was called in question, they would
be cited to state what they knew. In the case of legal decisions,
both judges and jury occur as witnesses in this
sense. Hence, in a great many cases the distinctions drawn
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
above do not hold. Whether the term <foreign rend='italic'>šîbu</foreign> was ever applied
to the third class is doubtful. Their names are usually
preceded by the sign which means <q>before,</q> however
it was read.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Settlements out of court</note>
4. <hi rend='bold'>Cases of dispute settled out of court.</hi>&mdash;When parties
disagreed, they might discuss their difference between
themselves and arrive at an agreement. Then they procured
a scribe, who embodied the agreement in a binding
compact, <foreign rend='italic'>duppu lâ ragâmi</foreign>. This took the form of a
contract, the parties mutually undertaking not to withdraw
from the agreement, re-open the dispute, or bring legal
action, one against the other. To give sanction to this
agreement, they swore by the gods and the king. Witnesses
were called upon to be cognizant of and attest the
contract; and their names were added to the contract. To
authenticate their names both parties and witnesses often
impressed their seals or, in default of seals, made a nail-mark.
The date was then added. Each party seems to have taken
a copy of the agreement and the scribe held a third, or deposited
it in the archives. Such cases may be said to have
been settled <q>out of court.</q> At any rate they contain no
reference to a judge, or court. But it is possible that the
administration of the oath was a judicial, or perhaps a sacerdotal
function. Further, the witnesses may have been
drawn from a body of men held in readiness at court to
perform that function. It is certain in some cases, that
agreements arrived at independently were taken to a judge
for confirmation,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 38,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 838.</note> and the Code expressly directs some
cases to be taken to a judge. But it is probable that many cases
were settled by mutual agreement.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Recourse to a judge</note>
When the intervention of a judge was deemed essential,
one of the parties <q>complained.</q> The word really means
to <q>cry out,</q> <q>protest</q>; but it is used in the freest way as
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
equivalent to bringing the action. There is no evidence that
anyone then submitted to wrong <q>under protest.</q> Whether
the people were naturally litigious, or simply because access
to the courts was so easy, a protest usually involved a suit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The advocate</note>
The plea was made by the principals to the suit. There
is no mention of an advocate, or solicitor. But the verb
generally used of the plea <foreign rend='italic'>ragâmu</foreign>,
gives rise to <foreign rend='italic'>targumânu</foreign>,
the original of the modern dragoman. He usually appears
in later texts as the <q>interpreter,</q> but may originally have
been the <q>advocate.</q> At any rate, in the bilingual days
he might well have combined the offices. Another verb
common at this period, <foreign rend='italic'>pakâru</foreign>,
gave rise to <foreign rend='italic'>pâkirânu</foreign>, later
the usual word for <q>plaintiff,</q> or <q>claimant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The plaintiff in the reports</note>
Here may be noted a peculiarity of the scribe's conception
of the case. It will be found that, as he puts the case, the
plaintiff generally loses. This is because the scribe will not
prejudge the case by saying who was right. He writes <q>A
claimed the property of B.</q> In actual fact it may have
been that B laid claim to what he proved was his. But
that excludes the scribe from saying that B claimed the
property of A, because it never was A's. Hence, writing
after the event, he ascribes the property to the rightful
owner from the start of his document, and regards the
wrongful holder as laying claim to it. Hence, we must not
assume that the parties were not both claimants. In fact,
both parties agreed, as a rule, so far as to submit their case
to a judge. This is clear from the statements which follow
the statement of the cause of dispute. Both parties <q>went
to the judges,</q> or rather quaintly, <q>they captured a judge.</q>
The preliminary discussion between the parties resulted in
agreement to submit the case to a judge. Both were willing
to abide by the decision. Once, it is true, the plaintiff is
said to have caught the defendant;<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 79.</note>
but there is no evidence
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
of unwillingness to submit. So too, when the parties
are said to <q>receive a judge,</q> they evidently both
sought him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Summons before the judge</note>
Sometimes affairs did not go so smoothly. One party
had to act and bring the other before the judges<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 100,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 294.</note> or
<q>caused them to come before the judge.</q>
</p>

<p>
There are indications that the judges sometimes had to
summon a party before them, or as the scribe puts it,
<q>bring him before the other party.</q> This is also expressed
by the judges <q>sending up</q> a party.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 272.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Appeals</note>
There is considerable evidence that cases might be sent
before the judges by a higher party, the king himself.
These cases were probably on the suit of a plaintiff. In the
letters of the First Dynasty we have examples of the king
sending to the local judges his own decision on the case,
which they had to carry out; or in other cases he simply
sent the case for trial.<note place='foot'>King, <hi rend='italic'>Letters
of Ḥammurabi</hi>, p. xxxix f.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various places for holding a court</note>
The parties, having found a judge and obtained a day for
hearing, <q>entered,</q> or <q>went down to,</q> the great temple of
Shamash, at Sippara, called Ebabbarim.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 360.</note> There, as we
know, Ḥammurabi set up one of the copies of the Code.
The case was heard sometimes at the <q>old gate.</q><note
place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 711.</note> At
Babylon, the parties were taken to the temple of Merodach,
Esagila.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 100.</note> At Larsa, the <q>gate</q> of
<hi rend='italic'>NIN-MAR-KI</hi>, or the
temple of Sin, might be chosen.<note place='foot'>B 57, 73.</note> The temple of Ishhara
is also named.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 279.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legal procedure</note>
5. <hi rend='bold'>Procedure.</hi>&mdash;We have only scattered hints regarding
legal procedure. The Code says that the judges <q>saw
the pleas.</q><note place='foot'>§ 9.</note> The scribe uses the same
expression.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2444 A.</note> As
a rule, he records the plaintiff's statement of claim first.
Then he records a counter-statement. There is a strong
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
suggestion that he quotes from written documents. The
judges read these, or heard the verbal statements.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The deity the theoretical source of all judicial authority</note>
As part of the legal process, the object in dispute, or, at
any rate, the deeds relating to it, were brought into court,
and resigned into the hands of the god.<note place='foot'>M. A.
P., 79, 105.</note> He was to discern
the rightful owner and restore the object to him.
Hence the decision was <q>the judgment of Shamash in the
house of Shamash,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2463.</note> the judgment of the house of Shamash.</q><note
place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 327.</note>
So the defendant was said <q>to make his account
before Shamash.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
301.</note> In bringing a suit the parties <q>sought
the altar of Shamash.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
272.</note> In case of loss or damage, the
claimant recounted it <q>before god.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Summoning witnesses</note>
In confirmation of the statements alleged witnesses might
be called for, who were put on oath before god and the
king. They were supposed to know the object claimed and
whose it was,<note place='foot'>§§ 122, 123.</note> or to
know that a transaction had taken place.<note place='foot'>§ 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bribing witnesses</note>
Tampering with witnesses, or with a jury, was penalized
by the Code.<note place='foot'>§§ 3, 4.</note> The judges
might refuse to accept the witness,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 160.</note> and then might decide the case on the sworn deposition
of the plaintiff.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Different kinds of testimony</note>
Documentary evidence might be demanded. The judges
might decide to take the evidence of their own senses and
go to see an estate or a house in dispute.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2182.</note> Or they might
determine that it was a case for the accused to purge himself,
which he did by oath.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2181.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rendering the decision</note>
Having thus informed themselves of the rights of the
case the judges proceeded to pronounce a decision, <q>they
caused them to receive judgment.</q> This phrase nearly
always occurs in the legal decisions. The decision might
be called <q>the judgment of the particular judge,</q> for
example, <foreign rend='italic'>dîn Išarlim</foreign>, <q>Israel's
judgment.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2474.</note>
The sentence
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
is sometimes stated in the words of the judges themselves,
introduced by <foreign rend='italic'>ikbu</foreign>, <q>they
said.</q><note place='foot'> B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2458.</note> Thus we read <q>the tablet which A granted to B is good, they
said.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2516.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The collection of damages</note>
If one party was in the wrong, the judges <q>laid the wrong
on him,</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
387.</note> or <q>put him in the wrong.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2182.</note> When the suit was
to recover a debt, or find compensation, the judges might
name a sum which they paid over to the proper
person.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2458.</note>
This was damages, not a fine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Breaking a contract-tablet</note>
A ceremony which often took place on the annulment of
a former agreement, or cancelling of a deed was the breaking
of the tablet embodying the former contract. The
same ceremony took place on repayment of a debt, or on
dissolution of a partnership, apparently without recourse
to judges. This was ordered by the Code in case of purchases
of property which it was illegal to sell or buy, such
as the benefice of a reeve or runner.<note place='foot'>§ 37.</note> So when an adopted
child had failed to carry out the bond to nourish and care
for the adoptive parent, the deed of adoption was formally
broken by the judges.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
586, 2177 A.</note>
</p>

<p>
For later times we have little evidence. What there is
was collected by Kohler-Peiser,<note place='foot'>A. B. R.
<hi rend='italic'>passim.</hi></note> and agrees in general with
the above.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The legal decision</note>
6. <hi rend='bold'>The decision.</hi>&mdash;In these ways the judges <q>quieted the
strife,</q> <q>composed the complaint.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 327.</note> It was the standard
conception of a legal decision that it should be irrevocable.
The Code enacts the deprivation and deposition of a judge
for revoking his judgment.<note place='foot'>§ 5.</note> The legal decisions lay down
the stipulation that the losing party shall not <q>turn back,</q>
shall not <q>complain.</q> These phrases nearly always occur,
as they do also in contracts. To insure compliance with the
decision the judges again exacted an oath. Whether both
parties swore, or only the losers, is not clear. The statement
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
usually is <q>they swore,</q> without mention of the persons
who did so.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Documentary form</note>
The decision, being complete, was embodied in a document
drawn up by the scribe, regularly witnessed, often
by the judges, and sealed. Thus it was that the judges
granted him an irrevocable tablet.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 387.</note> These irrevocable
tablets, practically imperishable also, have now come after
thousands of years, to tell their tale.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Administration of oaths</note>
7. <hi rend='bold'>Administration of the oath.</hi>&mdash;The ceremony of swearing
to the truth of evidence, or the terms of a compact, is continually
mentioned. The exact form of words used in taking
the oath is not certain; but in actual suits, in the law-court
procedure, the judges administered an oath to both
parties and witnesses. In the Code oaths were admitted
for purgation of alleged crime,<note place='foot'>§§ 20, 131,
227, 266.</note> as evidence of loss, deposit,
injury;<note place='foot'>§§ 23, 103, 120, 126, 206,
240, 249.</note> and the reception of a sworn deposition is
recorded.<note place='foot'>§ 9.</note> References to oaths continually occur in the
contracts.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Form of the oath</note>
The judges <q>gave them to the oath before Shamash and
Adad,</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
160.</note> or, more briefly, <q>gave him to the oath of god.</q><note
place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 188.</note>
The name of the god by whom men swore is usually given.
As might be expected, the god who figured most prominently
in the Code was Shamash, the chief deity of Sippara,
often associated with his consort, Aia, or Malkatu. Sometimes
the oath was <q>by the king.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 295.</note> Often one or more gods
and the king are named together. When Babylon became
supreme it was usual to swear by Marduk and the local
gods as well. The significance of these oaths for historical
purposes is great, both as indicating political relationships,
and as often affording by the name of the king the
only clew to the date of the document. Mr. King, in his
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
edition of the Chronicle,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Letters of
Ḥammurabi</hi>, pp. 212-54.</note> and Dr. Lindl,<note place='foot'>B. A. S.,
iv., p. 338 f.</note> have made skilful
use of these oaths in determining chronology.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The place where it was administered</note>
The administration of the oath took place before the
censer of Shamash<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
199.</note> or at the shrine, <foreign rend='italic'>Šašaru</foreign>, of
Shamash,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2178 A.</note>
in Sippara; or before the emblematic dragon sculptured
on the doors of the Marduk temple at Babylon.<note place='foot'>B<hi
rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2182.</note> Other
places are named which we are not yet able to identify.
A kind of magical conjuration appears sometimes to have
been employed,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
199.</note> which is not yet understood.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its purport</note>
The purport of the oath was, not to give false evidence,
or, in the case of contracts, not to alter the stipulated agreements.
It is often followed by the words, <q>whoever shall
alter or dispute the words of this tablet,</q> evidently a quotation
of the words of the oath; but the consequence of so
doing is not given. Either it was too well known, or too
awful, for the scribe to write it down.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its gradual decrease in importance</note>
In Assyrian times the oath did not play such an important
part. Still, it was in use occasionally. The oath is
generally found in documents of the grand style, such as
royal charters. Oaths also are of interest for the pantheon
of Assyria.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., § 604.</note> A common way of expressing the same
thing was to call on a god to be judge of the case, as for
example, <q>Shamash be judge,</q> or <q>Shamash be advocate,</q>
that is, <q>take up the case.</q> So the king's son, or crown
prince, is invoked to be the advocate. An appeal was
also made to the decision of the king. The gods, <q>Ashur,
Sin, Shamash, Bêl, and Nabû, the gods of Assyria, shall
require it at his hands</q> is another way of putting the case.
These examples illustrate the meaning of the older oaths.
There do not seem to be any cases of the witnesses being
put on oath.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its preservation as an antique form</note>
But the oath lingered on into very late Babylonian times,
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
when we have some very full forms. If anyone shall
change or alter the agreement, <q>may Marduk and Zarpanit
decree his destruction.</q><note place='foot'>Nbk., 368.</note> In Persian times we find
a curse on the same breach of faith in the terms, <q>whosoever shall
attempt to alter this agreement, may Anu, Bêl, and Ea curse
him with a bitter curse, may Nabû, the scribe of Esagila,
put a period to his future.</q><note place='foot'>Cyr., 277.</note> It is curious thus
to note a recrudescence of old forms in these later times. Was
it merely an antiquarian fashion or had the Persians earlier
come under strong Babylonian influence and preserved
the old forms which had died out in their native home?
The Elamite contracts suggest exactly the same question.
In them it seems evident that Elam, once under Babylonian
influence, adopted and preserved, under native
rulers, forms of which we have no trace in Babylonia, but
which clearly came from that country. Assyria is another
case in point. She kept forms which we know date back
before the time of her independence and which had disappeared
from the contemporary Babylonian documents.
In the later Babylonian times we still find the parties and
the witnesses in a law-court put to the oath.<note place='foot'>Cyr.,
312, A. B. R., II., pp. 16, 73.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalties for perjury</note>
8. <hi rend='bold'>Penalties.</hi>&mdash;An unsuccessful suitor was not allowed to
get off merely with the loss of his suit. He had been put on
his oath and been unable to justify himself, or the word that
he had spoken. According to the Code, if the suit was a
capital suit, this was punished with death.<note place='foot'>§ 3.</note> But even if
the case was less serious, it was slander to have brought a
false accusation, and the penalty for slander was branding.<note place='foot'>§
127.</note> This penalty was inflicted on an unsuccessful suitor for
possession of a house sold by his father.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2190.</note> Another form
of penalty for unsuccessful litigation was that the suitor
should not only lose his case but actually be condemned
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
to pay the penalty which he, if successful, would have
brought on the other party.<note place='foot'>§§ 4, 13.</note> That this is what was
really intended by the clauses is shown by the case of Belilitum,
who as late as <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 555,<note place='foot'>Nbd.
13.</note>having brought a suit to recover a
debt which she alleged was not paid, was convicted of perjury
by the production of the receipt, and by the evidence
of her own children, and not only lost her case, but was
condemned to pay the sum for which she had sued to him
from whom she sought to obtain it. This was of course a
form of retaliation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Forfeits</note>
In Assyrian times the parties usually bound themselves
not to litigate, nor attempt to disturb the settlement made
between them, under heavy forfeits to the treasury of a
god, often tenfold the value of the object in dispute, and
sometimes prohibitive in amount. Such sums as two talents
of silver, or two talents of gold, controvert the idea
that these forfeits were looked upon as possible deposits by
a claimant desiring to reopen the case. They were terrific
penalties intended to deter any attempt at litigation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nature of the forfeits</note>
The forfeit sometimes took the form of white horses, or
foals (?), which were dedicated to a divinity. Very interesting
is the mention of the dedication of the eldest child to a
god, or goddess. This is worded as if the dedication was to
be by fire. The additional mention of incense or cedarwood,
as accompanying the offering, renders it probable that
it was really meant that the litigant should be punished by
the sacrifice of his child as a <q>burnt offering</q> to the god.
But this only makes it clearer that such penalties were
simply meant to be deterrent. We have no proof that such
an offering ever took place. It was a memory of bygone
horrors, but not less interesting as showing what had once
been possible. A more natural and extremely common
penalty was the payment of a tenfold value to the disturbed
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
owner. In later times this was twelvefold. This was
an example of the multiple restitution so common in the Code.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ordeal</note>
Something very like an ordeal was occasionally imposed.
The very fragmentary condition of the texts which give it
adds to its obscurity. But it appears to have consisted in
the litigant being compelled to eat a mina weight of some
magically concocted food and to drink the contents of an inscribed
bowl. What the result was expected to be is not
stated. One fragmentary text appears to name the ingredients
of the magic potion. All that can be made out points
to an ordeal, somewhat similar to that inflicted upon a suspected
wife in Numbers v. 12-31.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='bold'>Penalties for wrong-doing.</hi>&mdash;We are chiefly indebted
to the Code for our knowledge of the penalties which the
judge and his assessors might inflict.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The death-penalty</note>
Foremost we may place the death-penalty. This was
inflicted by the Code for witchcraft, for theft, for corruption
of justice, for rape, for causing death by assault, for neglect
of duties by certain officials, for allowing a seditious assembly,
for causing death by bad building, and for varieties of
these crimes. It is curious that no mention is made of murder
pure and simple. But this is only accidental. It is
evidently assumed. For the Code brings several cases of
murder under this penalty. Procuring the death of a husband
is punished by it; even a fatal assault, as that on a
pregnant woman who dies of miscarriage as the result.
The need of an oath to establish lack of malice in giving a
blow in a quarrel which led to death tends to show that
murder was punished by death, and that it was regarded
as death intentionally caused. An explicit statement was
clearly not needed. We do not yet know how this sentence
was carried out. Usually the Code only says <q>he
shall be killed</q>; by whom, or how, is not stated. For
special cases the manner is described.
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Drowning</note>
Death by drowning was inflicted on a beer-seller for selling
beer too cheaply; on a woman for adultery, for being a
bad wife, for incest, or for desertion of her husband's house.
In every case the victim was a woman. When men were
drowned they shared a woman's fate. In two cases, adultery
and incest, we read of the criminals being bound. In
the latter, § 155, it seems that the man was <q>bound</q> and
the woman drowned. In the former, § 129, both were
<q>bound</q> and both drowned. It is hardly likely that
<q>bound</q> can mean merely tied up, or imprisoned, in the
case of the man who committed incest. I would suggest
that in both cases it means <q>strangled.</q> The alternative
would be that the confusion in § 155 is due to the
scribe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Burning</note>
Death by fire is directly ordered for a votary who opens
or enters a beer-shop, for a man and his mother in incest,
and indirectly for a thief at a fire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Impalement</note>
Impalement on a stake is ordered for a wife procuring
her husband's death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ordeal by water</note>
Indirectly the death-penalty would often be the consequence
of an appeal to the ordeal by water, in §§ 2, 132.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mutilations</note>
The various sorts of mutilation named are of two types:
(1) retaliation for bodily disfigurement, (2) symbolical of
the offence itself. Thus eye for eye, tooth for tooth, limb
for limb, are pure retaliations. But the hands cut off mark
the sin of the hands in striking a father, in unlawful surgery,
or in branding. The eye torn out was the punishing
of unlawful curiosity. The ear cut off marked the sin of
the organ of hearing and obedience. The tongue was cut
out for the ingratitude evidenced in speech.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Scourging</note>
Scourging is the only other form of corporal punishment.
It was done with an ox-hide scourge, or thong, and sixty
strokes were ordered to be publicly inflicted for a gross assault
on a superior.
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Banishment</note>
Banishment from the city was the penalty for incest.<note place='foot'>§ 154.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Simple restitution</note>
Restitution may, perhaps, hardly be regarded as a penalty.
Thus a man who was found in possession of lost
property had to restore it. In case of loss caused by neglect
or ill-treatment of hired property, or of goods deposited or
intrusted, or by want of care in treating diseased limbs,
restitution, goods for goods, ox for ox, ass for ass, <hi rend='italic'>et cetera</hi>,
was ordered.<note place='foot'>§§ 9, 10, 12, 125, 219, 231, 232, 245, 246, 263.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Multiple restitution</note>
But restitution of many times the damage inflicted is a
distinct penalty. The Code orders threefold for cheating a
principal,<note place='foot'>§ 106.</note> fivefold for loss or theft of goods by
carrier,<note place='foot'>§ 112.</note> sixfold for defrauding an
agent,<note place='foot'>§ 107.</note> tenfold for theft by a
poor man, or for careless loss by shepherd or herdsman,<note place='foot'>§§ 8,
265.</note> twelvefold for a false sentence by a judge,<note place='foot'>§ 5.</note>
thirtyfold for theft on the part of a gentleman.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Retaliation</note>
The infliction of the same loss on a criminal that he caused
another is seen in the cases of mutilation, eye for eye, limb
for limb, tooth for tooth,<note place='foot'>§§ 196, 197,
200.</note> but also in the penalty of son for
son, daughter for daughter, slave for slave;<note place='foot'>§§ 116,
210, 219, 230, 231.</note> and in the rule
that a vexatious suitor shall pay the penalty which his suit
was calculated to bring on the defendant.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Vicarious punishment</note>
This retaliation is the explanation of what seems to be
vicarious punishment, where a man suffers in the person of
his son, or daughter, for the loss he has caused to the son
or daughter of another.<note place='foot'>§§ 116, 210, 230.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loss of claim</note>
Another penalty was the voidance of a claim. If a man
took the law into his own hands to repay his debt, he lost
all claim to recover it through the courts. When the purchase
was illegal and void, as that of an officer's benefice or
of a ward's property, the purchaser had to return his purchase
and lose what he had paid for it.
</p>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cases where no claim is allowed</note>
In certain cases no suit was allowed to gain standing.
Contributory negligence,<note place='foot'>§ 123.</note> the natural death of hostage for
debt,<note place='foot'>§ 115.</note> the accidental goring of a man by a wild
bull,<note place='foot'>§ 250.</note> are
excluded from litigation. Such events cancel all further
claim or are expressly said to have no remedy. There is
no case for prosecution.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Compensation</note>
Compensation for loss caused by crime, or neglect, is
ordered on a scale fixed by the Code. Where a tenant takes
a field on produce-rent his neglect to cultivate caused a loss
to the landlord. He was thus bound to pay an average
yield, or a crop like his neighbor's, or that of the next
field.<note place='foot'>§ 42.</note> In later times, the vagueness of this rule, which
might give rise to dispute, was avoided by stating in the
lease the average rent to be expected. For certain classes
of land, where no comparison with the next field could be
instituted, a fixed rate was set down.<note place='foot'>§ 44.</note> Compensation for
premature ejectment was ordered.<note place='foot'>§ Y.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VI. Legal Decisions</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Meaning of the term</note>
By a legal decision we understand a <q>judgment</q> pronounced
by some judicial authority upon a case submitted.
It is not easy to say whether the Babylonians had a separate
name for this sort of transaction; but it had some
peculiarities by which it can be easily recognized. It usually
opens with the words, <foreign rend='italic'>duppu ana</foreign>, <q>tablet on,</q>
followed by the statement of the object in dispute. This is very
often abbreviated to a simple <foreign rend='italic'>ana</foreign>, <q>on,</q> or
<foreign rend='italic'>aššum = ana šum</foreign>, <q>concerning,</q> or
<foreign rend='italic'>eli</foreign> with the same sense.
</p>

<p>
These usages explain the curious tablet<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 316.</note> where we have
a long series of sections each containing names associated
with other names by the word <foreign rend='italic'>aššum</foreign>. Thus we
read:<note place='foot'>Rev. 1-4.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Nishînishu, daughter of Rîsh-Sin, <foreign rend='italic'>aššum</foreign>
Shamash-ellatsu, son of Itti-Sin-dinim.</q>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Technical terms used</note>
It is not clear whether Shamash-ellatsu was the adversary
of Nishînishu, or the subject of her suit. But we clearly
have here a <q>trial list</q> of seventeen cases. Whether they
were all decided in one day, month, or year, or whether they
were reserved for the royal audience, we have no means of
telling. It is merely a list. The object in dispute, <q>two <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>
of land,</q> is occasionally given; or the court is named <q>the
temple of Shamash,</q> or <q>at the gate of Shamash.</q> The
whole text is too fragmentary to be translated, but we may
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
note that some lady or other is always a party to the suit.
If we could find the tablets referring to the decisions intended
and they should turn out to be of different years,
this list might prove of value for chronology.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their arrangement</note>
Legal decisions relate to all manner of subjects and consequently
are difficult to arrange. Dr. Meissner adopted
the excellent plan of appending them to the groups concerned
with the class of property dealt with under them.
Thus a legal decision concerned with the sale of a house
would be grouped with the house sales. But this does not
suit all cases, and both in formula and subject the legal
decisions are really distinct. Most legal decisions add nothing
to our knowledge of the law, merely recording that <q>A
sued B and lost the day and is now bound over not to renew
the litigation.</q> A large number go only a little further,
thus:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 511.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Suit concerning inheritance</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Ribatum, daughter of Salâ, was sued by the sons of Erib-Sin,
Shumma-ilu and Mâr-erṣitim, concerning what Salâ, her father, and
Mullubtim, her mother, had left her. They took judges who restored
to her one-half <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of land, her property. Shumma-ilu and
Mâr-erṣitim, sons of Erib-Sin, shall not renounce this agreement nor
dispute it. They swore by Shamash, Malkat, Marduk, and Samsu-iluna
the king. Four judges appear as witnesses. Dated the 10th
of Elul, in the second year of Samsu-iluna.
</quote>

<p>
Here it is not stated what was the ground on which the
parties disagreed, nor that they laid claim to more than one-half
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of land. They lost the case. That is all we know
in many other cases. Often we do not know the object in
dispute. Other cases are quite full and often very instructive.
Thus:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2474.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Suit for paternal power over daughter</note>
<quote rend='display'>
About the maid Adkallim, whom Aiatîa had left to her daughter
Ḥulaltum. Ḥulaltum had taken care of her mother Aiatîa; while
Sin-nâṣir, the husband of Aiatîa, who was in Buzu for twenty years,
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
had left Aiatîa to her fate, loved her not. Now after Aiatîa was
dead, Sin-nâṣir laid claim on whatever Aiatîa had, and on Ḥulaltum
for the maid Adkallim. Isharlim, the <foreign rend='italic'>rabiânu</foreign> of Sippar,
with the Kar-Sippar, assigned sentence; they laid the blame on him. He
shall not renounce the agreement, nor dispute it. They swore by
Shamash, Marduk, and Ḥammurabi the king. The judgment of
Isharlim. Four witnesses. Dated in Elul, the 9th year of Ḥammurabi.
</quote>

<p>
This was a bad case of desertion. The husband, Sin-nâṣir,
deserted his wife for twenty years, but on her death
came back and claimed her property. This he was not allowed
to do, by the Code.<note place='foot'>§ 136.</note> In his absence, Ḥulaltum had
cared for Aiatîa, either as his real, or only adopted, daughter.
In either case, Aiatîa had left Ḥulaltum a slave-girl, Adkallim,
whom Sin-nâṣir now claimed. His claim was disallowed.
</p>

<p>
The decisions which we now possess give little further
information as to the legal procedure, but a series of abstracts
will illustrate the legal points which they raise.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Ṣilli-Ishtar and Amêl-ili, sons of Ilu-eriba, were sued by Eribam-Sin,
son of Ubar-Sin, concerning a house, etc., which they bought of
Sin-mubaliṭ and his brothers. They say that they bought with
money which Ṣilli-Ishtar received from his mother and which formed
no part of that which they had in common with plaintiff as partners.
Deposition accepted. Ḥammurabi 34.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 39.</note>
</p>

<p>
The sons of Zâziâ sue Sin-imgurâni and Sin-uzilli for rights in
a house next the temple of Ningirsu, five days' income in the temple
of Sin, sixteen days' income in the shrine of Bêlit, and eight
days' income in the shrine of Gula. Claim not made out. Era of
Isin 6.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 41.</note>
</p>

<p>
Idin-Adadi and Mattatum have no claim on property which
Ḥishatum has or shall inherit. Rim-Sin (?).<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 44.</note>
</p>

<p>
Adadi-idinnam and Ardi-Martu agree on dissolution of partnership.
Zabum 1.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 79.</note>
</p>

<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>

<p>
Brothers of Ur-ilishu agree not to proceed against Sala-ilu and
Ur-ilishu concerning property left by latter. Apil-Sin (?).<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 111.</note>
</p>

<p>
Family of Urra-gâmil sue Erib-Sin for account of his partnership
with and his indebtedness to Urra-gâmil deceased. Erib-Sin
settles. N. D.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 301.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sin-ellâtsu gave a ring to Ramê-Ishḫara. The children of Sin-ellâtsu
agree not to sue her for it. Ḥammurabi (?).<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2465.</note>
</p>

<p>
Private settlement of claims to property. N.
D.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2473.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
In the above cases there is no explicit mention of judges.
The next group are cases before judges where fact of suit,
subject and result are given, but not the pleas presented.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Imgur-Sin and Ilu-eriba sue Iatratum concerning a house which
she bought of their father. Nonsuited. Before judges of Babylon
and Sippara.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ṣilli-Ishtar and Eribam-Sin entered into partnership. On dissolution
of their partnership they chose judges, paid in their common
stock and shared equally. The shares are scheduled in the deed of
settlement. Ḥammurabi 34.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 78.</note>
</p>

<p>
Pala-Shamash and Apil-itishu dispute concerning a division of
property. They obtain judges and city witnesses. The whole house
and income is shared equally and each agrees to waive further claim.
Ḥammurabi (?).<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 80.</note>
</p>

<p>
The two sons of Ḳû-Ishtar disagreed as to their shares. Nidnat-Sin,
the <foreign rend='italic'>rab</foreign> Martu, makes equitable division. Ḥammurabi
33.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 110.</note>
</p>

<p>
Apil-ilishu and Pala-Shamash dispute the latter's right to a
house, ship, servants, money, and property in his possession. The
city elders from Ḥuda and Shibabi gave judgment and confirmed
the title of Pala-Shamash.<note place='foot'>B 199.</note>
</p>

<p>
The sons of Nûr-Shamash sue Bêlitum for the property left her.
Before judges. Nonsuited. Sumu-lâ-ilu.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 327.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shunu-ma-ili and Mâr-erṣitim sue Ribatum concerning her right
to the legacy of Salâ and Mullubtim. The judges assign her an
income, <foreign rend='italic'>ḫibiltu</foreign>. Samsu-iluna
2.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 511.</note>
</p>

<p>
Marduk-mubaliṭ and Sin-idinnam sue Shâd-Malkat concerning
her house in Bît Gagim. Judges confirm her title.
Apil-Sin.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 586.</note>
</p>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<p>
Ḥuzalum and Pî-Malkat, children of Nabi-Shamash implead
Shidi-lamazatanḫu of Gagim concerning various rights to incomes
and rations in the temple of Shamash. The judges assign shares to
each. Samsu-iluna (?).<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2175 A.</note>
</p>

<p>
Aliḳu and Sumu-ramê sue Shakumâtim about a house they sold
him. Nonsuited. N. D.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2177 A.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shamash-bêl-ili repudiates a sale of land to the Lady Mannashi.
He is nonsuited. Ḥammurabi 15.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2178 A.</note>
</p>

<p>
Family of Ardi-rabish against Erib-Sin on account of property
left them by Ardi-rabish. Nonsuited. Sin-mubalit
20.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2181.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ḥamaziru sues Manutum for house and property but is nonsuited.
Sumu-lâ-ilu.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2186.</note>
</p>

<p>
Kasha-Upi bought a house of Itti-itishu and his sons, Bêlshunu
and Ilushu-bânî. Amêl-Ninshuna, son of Bêlshunu, brought a suit
about the house. Judges condemn him to be branded on the forehead
and confirm Kasha-Upi's title. Sin-mubalit.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2190.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nishinishu sues Ana-erishti-Malkat for three <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of land before
the king's judges. Nonsuited. Samsu-iluna 2.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2444 A.</note>
</p>

<p>
Malkat-kuzub-mâtim sues Ani-talime for restitution of a field,
before the judges of Babylon and Sippara. The witnesses sustain
her claim, which is granted. Samsu-iluna 3.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2458.</note>
</p>

<p>
The family of Izidaria sue the family of Azalîa about the property
of Izidaria deceased. Their title is confirmed. Zabum
12.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2463.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shamash-bêl-ili sues Nidnusha concerning a house bought by him of
her. The judges grant him two shekels of silver. Ḥammurabi
1.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2502.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shî-lamazi sues her brothers for a field and wins her
case.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2193.</note>
</p>

<p>
Before Lushtamar, <foreign rend='italic'>nâgiru</foreign> of Babylon, Adadi-idinnam and
Ibku-Ishtar, judges, Zariku was put to the oath and replied to Erib-Sin.
He was told that as his domicile was at Sippara, he must not make
his appeal to the judges of Babylon. So his case was dismissed.
Ḥammurabi 28.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 824.</note>
The record is defective.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Cases before judges where the plea and its result can be
made out with some certainty are as follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Ardi-Sin, son of Eṭiru, sued the sons of Shamash-nâṣir who had
sold a plot of land, two and a half <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> in area, to Ibni-Adadi the
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
merchant. He claimed the land as ancestral domain,
<foreign rend='italic'>bît abišu</foreign>, and
denied that he had ever alienated it. The sons of Ibni-Adadi, now in
possession, produced the deed of sale, <foreign rend='italic'>duppu šimâti</foreign>,
which Eṭiru and Sin-nâdin-shûmi, his brother, had executed to Shamash-nâṣir and
his son. The judges assigned a small portion of the land, about
a sixth, to Ardi-Sin, but make up the rest, apparently, from another
quarter. Ammizaduga (?).<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mâr-Martu bought the garden of Sin-mâgir. Ilubânî disputed
the legality, <foreign rend='italic'>ṣimdattu</foreign>,
of the sale. Before the judges at the gate of
Nin-marki he deposed that he was the adopted son of Sin-mâgir,
which adoption had never been revoked. In the time of Rim-Sin
the house and garden had been awarded to Ilubânî and then Sin-mubaliṭ
had brought a suit against Ilubânî, which was regularly
heard before judges and witnesses from Nin-marki. They had
awarded the house and garden to Ilubânî. Sin-mubaliṭ was now
bound over to dispute the title no more. Ḥammurabi.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 43.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Here it seems that on the deposition of Rim-Sin by Ḥammurabi,
Sin-mubaliṭ, excluded by his bond from disputing
Ilubânî's title, sold his claim to Mâr-Martu, who attempted
to enter into possession. Possibly it was thought that the
new rulers would reverse the old decision.
</p>

<note place='margin'>Right of a widow on remarriage to her husband's
property or gifts</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
The sons of Namiatum sue their mother, Iashuḫatum, about her
share of their father's property. She appears before the judges of
Babylon and puts in an inventory to show that she has taken nothing
from the family possessions. Then the sons of Namiatum
renounce further claim on the ground of family possession to the
property of Idin-Adadi, Iashuḫatum and their descendants. Samsu-iluna
2.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 100.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
It seems that, after the death of Namiatum, Iashuḫatum
married again. The children of the first marriage bring an
action to secure judgment that she shall not take with her
any property of their father's. She had, as we know, a
right to take with her her marriage-portion, but not her
husband's gifts to her.
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Amêl-Ninsaḫ sues Garudu for the rent of a field. The debtor
not paying was ejected. Apil-Sin.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shûmi-erṣitim sues for right to a sheep and some corn, the
<foreign rend='italic'>naptánu</foreign>
of a god. Judges grant him half share. Ḥammurabi
9.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 188.</note>
</p>

<p>
Judges summon Ibik-iltum before Elali-bânî to account for corn.
He purges himself on oath. N. D.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 295.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amat-Shamash claims to be the adopted daughter of Shamash-gâmil
and his wife Ummi-Araḫtum. Her witnesses proving unsatisfactory,
her claim was disallowed on the oath of Ummi-Araḫtum
that they had never adopted her. Ḥammurabi
(?).<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 160.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ilushu-abushu hired a pack-ass, <foreign rend='italic'>imer bilti</foreign>,
of Ardi-Sin and Ṣilli-Ishtar
and lost it. The judges awarded them sixteen shekels of
silver as compensation. Apil-Sin 5.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 711.</note>
</p>

<p>
Babilîtum sued Erish-Saggil, Ubar-Nabium, and Marduk-nâṣir for
a share of her family possessions, <foreign rend='italic'>bît abiša</foreign>.
The judges assigned her
a share. Samsu-iluna 5.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
272.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nidnusha and Shamash-abilu sue the daughter of Sin-eribam
about property which she claimed to have inherited. They charge
her with having forged the will of Amti-Shamash in her favor. The
judges went to Gagim, where the property was, and examined witnesses
who proved that Amti-Shamash had left the property to the
daughter of Sin-eribam. The judges therefore confirmed her title.
N. D.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2182.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mâr-erṣitim left a female slave Damiḳtum to Erib-Sin. His wife
Mazabatum and his brother Ibni-Shamash dispute this legacy. The
judges inspect a document by which Erib-Sin, on the suit of Mâr-erṣitim,
had granted Damiḳtum to Mazabatum and Ibni-Shamash.
The judges return Damiḳtum to Mazabatum. Ḥammurabi
(?).<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2516.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legal practice of Assyrian times</note>
In Assyrian times we have comparatively few legal decisions.
The judges who appear are the <foreign rend='italic'>sartênu</foreign>, or chief-justice;
the <foreign rend='italic'>ḫazânu</foreign>, the chief civil magistrate of a city,
the parallel of the ancient <foreign rend='italic'>rabiânu</foreign>; the
<foreign rend='italic'>sukallu</foreign>, or chamberlain;
and one or two others, besides the simple <foreign rend='italic'>daiânu</foreign>,
or judge. Some of these are not judicial officers, but act in
that capacity.
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
Usually the judge is said to lay the blame on the guilty
party, <foreign rend='italic'>arnam eli A emêdu</foreign>; or to lay the penalty upon one,
<foreign rend='italic'>sartu eli A emêdu</foreign>. The sentence itself was a
<foreign rend='italic'>dienu</foreign>, or
<q>judgment.</q> As in former times, the legal decisions refer
to all manner of cases, and here more than anywhere else
a mere translation does not convey much meaning to the
reader.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Thus:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 160.</note> a scribe A prosecuted a farmer B for
the theft of a bull. They came before Nabû-zêr-kênish-lîshir, the deputy
<foreign rend='italic'>ḫazânu</foreign> of
Nineveh. Restitution, bull for bull, was imposed on the defendant,
who meantime was held for the fine. <q>On the day that he shall
have made good the value of the bull he shall go free.</q> Dated the
12th of Elul. Eponymy of Mushallim-Ashur. Twelve witnesses.
</p>

<p>
Again:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 161.</note>
A stole four slaves of B, who summoned him before the
<foreign rend='italic'>sukallu</foreign>.
The judge laid on him a fine of two hundred and ten minas
of copper. B then deposited a pledge with A, either himself, or a
slave, to perform work equivalent to the amount of the debt. If
B, or any representative of his, pays the money, the pledge is void.
<q>Whoever shall withdraw from this agreement, Ashur and Shamash
shall be his judges, he shall pay ten minas of silver and ten minas of
gold, he shall pay it in the treasury of Bêlit.</q> Dated the 10th of
Adar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 678. Eleven witnesses.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Here is another case, relating to a breach of trust:<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 164.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Damages for loss by agent</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<p>
The decision of the chief-justice, which he laid on Ḥanî. Three
hundred sheep, with their belongings, property of the king's son
were lost, or killed by the shepherds. Each shepherd was condemned
to pay two talents of bronze as his fine. Ḥanî, and his
people, and his fields, were taken as security for the payment for the
three hundred sheep, and the fines due from the shepherds. <q>Whoever
shall demand him, his <foreign rend='italic'>šaknu</foreign>,
his <foreign rend='italic'>rab kiṣir</foreign>, or any representative
of his, shall pay for three hundred sheep and the fines for the shepherds
and then Ḥanî shall be released.</q> Dated 27th of Sebat, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
679. Four witnesses.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The defendant had been intrusted with three hundred
sheep, which he had to return in full, with a proper increase
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
of lambs. But, evidently in the disorders which
arose on the death of Sennacherib, Ḥanî had lost or made
away with them. If he had intrusted them to shepherds,
either the shepherds had killed them, or, as some take it,
Ḥanî had killed the shepherds. In the former case he
owed two talents of bronze as fine from each shepherd, in
the latter he had to pay the same amount for each. Either
way, he was held responsible for the value of three hundred
sheep and two talents of bronze for each shepherd.
He and all he had were seized for the liability. It is interesting
to note that his district governor, or the colonel of
the regiment to which he belonged, was thought likely to
liberate him; but some other representative might do so.
The lost property belonged to the king's son. This may
have been Esarhaddon, or one of Sennacherib's other sons.
But, at any rate, it is clear that Esarhaddon was putting
his household in order.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Additional cases</note>
The other examples known to us do not add to our legal
knowledge. The subjects are chiefly misappropriations of
property and there is little variety.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later Babylonian decisions</note>
The later Babylonian tablets throw some light upon legal
procedure in Babylon. The greater detail exhibited by
them is due largely to the fact that for this period we have
so many private documents. The greater portion of the
material for this part of the subject has been worked over
by Professor J. Kohler and Dr. F. E. Peiser, in their valuable
treatise <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonische Rechtsleben</hi>. Little can be
added beyond additional examples and illustration.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Method of procedure</note>
The judges acted as a college and not separately. There
might be present at a case a chief judge and several judges
assisting. Other cases were decided before a single judge.
The <foreign rend='italic'>šibûtu</foreign> continue to act as a jury. They were the
elders of the city, competent to decide the rights of the case. But
the exact form of the organization is not yet quite clear.
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
The process began with the charge. The plaintiff preferred
this himself, or by a messenger. His plea was heard
and his proofs considered. Then the court caused the accused
to come before them and answer the charge.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The possible complications</note>
The process admitted of a third person intervening.
Thus, A had pledged a plot of land to B for thirty-two
shekels. Then he sold the property to C. C, dying, left
the property to D, who wished to take possession from B,
who continued to hold it in pledge. B goes to the judges
and complains against D. A, being yet alive, intervenes
and probably has to pay B. But the tablet being defective,
we are not able to follow the case further. Only we
see the sort of right which each had.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dispute for the possession of a sum of money</note>
Another case is where two parties dispute as to the possession
of a sum which is actually in the hands of a banker.
The banker accordingly undertakes to produce the sum and
its interest in court, and to pay it over to the successful party
in the suit. The decision was written down and the notary
of the court gave a copy to the plaintiff, if not also to the
defendant, and kept one copy for the archives. The plaintiff
thus obtained a guarantee against the defendant. But
how it was enforced we have no evidence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Suit regarding loan on mortgage</note>
The kind of points in dispute and decided are, as before,
exceedingly varied. The decisions for the most part illustrate
other subjects rather than the processes in court; but a
few examples may be of interest: A made an advance of
forty-four shekels to B, who pledged a house for it. This
state of affairs continued until both were dead. Their sons
inherited. A's son demanded forty-four shekels of B's son
who refused to pay. Both came before the judges. B's son,
pleaded that the money was never loaned or else repaid long
ago. The judges demanded evidence. Either the contract
or a receipt must be produced. The claimant was able to
present the contract, but no receipt was produced. So the
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
judges assigned the claimant a plot of land belonging to the
defendant as satisfaction for the proved debt. Here we have
the tablet witnessed by the chief judge, the judges, and the
notary.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 1128.</note> What is curious is that the claimant was not
content to keep the pledge. But it is probable that the debt
was secured on a house which the creditor did not take into
his possession. It is also surprising that the judges did not
order the house to be handed over to the claimant. That
may have been avoided, because of the family rights over
the house. The debtor might thus have been rendered
houseless, or have lost <q>his father's house.</q> The widow
may still have been an inmate. A great part of the document
is taken up with the specification of the land handed
over to the claimant. Hence a complete translation is not
given.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Regarding possession of a slave</note>
A common type of case was a vindication of right to
some sort of property. Thus<note place='foot'>Dar. 53.</note> A had sold B a slave, but
C came forward and said: <q>He is my slave who fled from
me,</q> and took an oath by Bêl and Nabû, that he knew
where that slave was living with A. The judges decide
that C shall go where the slave is, and when he has proved
that he is with A, the slave shall return to C.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Acknowledgment of a debt</note>
We have an acknowledgment before the court and a promise
to pay the debt. This promise was usually made on
oath, or guarantees were given. Here is an involved case.
A is father of B's mother. B's father is long dead. The
property of A, his grandfather, has now come into B's
hands. He finds an old bond for an advance from A to
C and D. The latter D is also dead but had a son E, who
inherited. Hence B now sues C and E for the money.
The bond is shown to C, who remembers and acknowledges
the debt and he now undertakes to bring his fellow-debtor
E and discharge the debt.
</p>

<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Settlement out of court</note>
Men did not always stand their trial, but sometimes settled
the case by an agreement out of court.<note place='foot'>Dar. 260.</note> A and his
wife sued B for some slaves, people of their house. B dreads
the trial and does not appear. The wife was B's mother,
evidently remarried. B brings the slaves whom he still has
and offers four minas as payment for one who has died in
his house. The offer is accepted and parties agree to be quit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A private settlement</note>
The decision of a dispute was not always referred to professional
judges. A very interesting example occurs,<note place='foot'>Dar. 410.</note> when
the eldest member of the family and <foreign rend='italic'>kinatti aplišu</foreign>,
<q>the family of his son,</q> act as judges. The plaintiff is an old
lady, who had been married, and had a daughter married.
These facts are not rehearsed in the tablet itself, which
concerns a division of property, but are collected from a
number of tablets, spread over some sixty years. The
way in which information is thus collected is an instructive
example of the manner in which the different documents
illustrate and explain one another.<note place='foot'>A. B. P., ii., pp. 70 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Agreements to appear in court</note>
Connected with legal decisions are the undertakings to
appear before the court, of which we have several examples.
Thus,<note place='foot'>Dar. 159.</note> A undertakes to bring B to Babylon and answer the
complaint of C. Or again, a certain gardener spoke to A
before an official of the <foreign rend='italic'>mâr banûtu</foreign>. This official was
subpœnaed, as we should say, and swore by Bêl, Nabû,
and Darius, that on the 8th of Sebat, two days hence, he
would come and take up the case.<note place='foot'>Dar. 229.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Production of witnesses</note>
The production of witnesses is the subject of not a few
undertakings. Thus,<note place='foot'>Dar. 299.</note> by a fixed date, five days hence, A
shall bring B to be questioned about some asses belonging
to the royal household. Again,<note place='foot'>Dar. 176.</note> N swears to come, six
days hence, and bring another, on account of the witness about
A. He further undertakes to establish the partnership.
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
What was the exact cause of quarrel was not stated. These
agreements to abide by the testimony of a named witness
may have been entered into without reference to judges, but
the oath may have been administered before the court.
Thus,<note place='foot'>Nbk. 52.</note> two parties agree to waive their dispute and abide
by witness produced. This they do before the <foreign rend='italic'>atû</foreign> official
of the gate of the temple. Again,<note place='foot'>Nbk. 183.</note> A is to bring
witnesses on the second of Ab, to the door of the
<foreign rend='italic'>tikkalu's</foreign> house,
and prove when and to whom he gave certain garments. If
this be proved, that B had received them, B will restore the
said garments to A; if not, B is free. Further, if B does
not appear on that day, he shall be bound to restore the garments.
Several other examples illustrate the point.<note place='foot'>A.
B. P., i., pp. 31 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Production of bond</note>
A common method was, as has already been shown, to produce
the bond or other document, establishing the claim.
If, for some reason, the document was not producible, the
oath of the scribe who wrote it might be admitted.<note place='foot'>A.
B. P., ii., p. 67.</note> The
witnesses whose names appear on the document do not
seem to have been summoned. But in one case,<note place='foot'>Camb. 384.</note> when two
Persians had sold two slave-girls, also Persians, to a Babylonian;
a third Persian, who had been witness to the sale,
was called on to swear, <q>I know that the money was paid,</q>
and he sealed the document.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VII. Public Rights</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The mixed population of Babylonia</note>
The early inhabitants of Babylonia are usually regarded
as a non-Semitic race, whom we term Sumerians. Upon
them was superimposed a layer of Semitic peoples. The
first dynasty of Babylon is now often called Arabian.
But the evidence of a previous admixture of peoples is
not lacking. The subsequent history bears witness to
many invasions by Kassites, Elamites, and nomad tribes,
some Semitic, some probably not. Later came Persians
and Medes, not to speak of Greeks and Parthians.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Position and rights of resident aliens</note>
The foreign wars brought slaves from all the surrounding
countries, even as far away as Egypt. We cannot here
enter into any discussion of the foreign elements in the
population; but it is important to note what the attitude
of the Babylonians was to the foreigners resident in their
midst. The evidence on the whole is very slight. It may
be said, that as a rule, resident aliens became citizens and
were under no disabilities. One section of the Code, if we
correctly understand it, allows an alien to purchase an
estate, provided he bears the liabilities to the state<note place='foot'>§ 40.</note>
which lay upon it. The <q>merchant</q> was probably usually an
alien, and only temporarily resident. In the contracts of
the Ḥammurabi period, with the exception of the frequent
West-Semitic names, we have little trace of aliens. When
the Kassites came we may expect the conquering race to
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
have had full rights. In Assyria there is no trace of
disability. Egyptians, Elamites, Armenians, Jews, Arameans,
contract exactly like natives. In later Babylonian
times we find the same freedom. Of course Persians, and,
later, Greeks, were under no disabilities. Hence there is
very little at any time to chronicle under this head.
</p>

<p>
We have marriages between Persians and Egyptians,
with witnesses, Babylonian, Persian, Aramean, and
Egyptian.<note place='foot'>Dar. 201.</note>
Medes rent a Babylonian's house, and live there.<note place='foot'>Dar. 57.</note>
A Persian buys of a Babylonian.<note place='foot'>Dar. 410.</note> A Persian father gives
Babylonian names to his children.<note place='foot'>Dar. 509.</note> A vivid picture of
the mixed nationality in the time of Artaxerxes II. is given in
the <q>Business Documents of Murashû Sons,</q> and the list
of proper names attached to Professor Hilprecht's edition
sufficiently illustrates the point.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tax on landed property</note>
Ownership of land carried its liabilities of tax or service.
These were carefully guarded and it was the mark of an
oppressor to exceed the normal demand. That, however,
seems to have been regularly and continually paid. A very
good illustration of public rights over land, or the relation
between the state and the private owner, is afforded by the
construction, in the reign of Cyrus, of a canal of Shamash
by the priest of Sippara. It was to pass through certain
lands and the consent of the owners had to be obtained.
The magistrates and honorables of the city A, through
which it would pass, and the peoples of the neighboring
fields were assembled. They were asked to swear, as Susians,
subjects of the King of Susa, that they would raise
no difficulty. Then the priest took on himself the cost of
the work on the canal, but stipulated that when it was
completed, the neighbors should keep it in repair. Also
he forbade the construction of any rival canal.<note place='foot'>Cyr.
231, 232.</note> Riparians
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
were responsible for the care of the canal as shown in the
Code.<note place='foot'>§ 53.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>State liabilities</note>
The state undertook some duties. In the Code we note
that the palace would, failing other means, redeem an
official from captivity.<note place='foot'>§ 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>District liabilities</note>
There were certain local liabilities of a public nature.
Thus the Code shows that the magistrate and his district
were held responsible for highway robbery or brigandage
in their midst.<note place='foot'>§ 24.</note> It may be assumed that the funds to meet
such liabilities were furnished by the city temple, for we
note that if an official were captured, and his private means
were not sufficient for his ransom, his city temple had to
furnish the money.<note place='foot'>§ 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General system of taxation</note>
The whole question of taxation is full of difficulties.
There were certain persons who paid tribute, that is, some
proportionate part of their produce, others did personal service.
There is frequent mention of dues of various sorts, at
ferries, market-places and the like. Demands were made
on the stock or crops of the farmers. But we are not yet
in a position even to sketch the system of taxation.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VIII. Criminal Law</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reason for the lack of information regarding criminal law</note>
Cases concerned with criminal law were naturally not embodied
in contracts. Some cases doubtless may be inferred
from the legal decisions, but these are only where the
penalty had already been commuted from death or punishment
to payment or restitution. They are better taken as
examples of civil law. But this distinction is not the cause
of their rarity or absence. When a man had to be put to
death, scourged, or exiled, there was no need for a written
bond. Hence the only references which we have outside
the Code and the phrase-books, are the penalties set down in
marriage-contracts for conjugal infidelity, or for breach of
contract voluntarily agreed to by the parties to it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Blood-vengeance commuted for a gift</note>
We have one case from Assyrian times of the assignment
of a slave-girl, as composition for manslaughter.
Atarkâmu, a scribe, had caused the death of Samaku, whose
son Shamash-ukîn-aḫi had the right to exact vengeance.
Whether as the result of a legal decision or not, Atarkâmu
hands over a slave-girl to Shamash-ukîn-aḫi and they agree
to be at peace. The name of Ashurbânipal occurs in a
position which strongly suggests that the king himself sat
in judgment upon the case. The tablet is so fragmentary
that little else can be made out, but it seems to have been
stipulated that the slave should be handed over <q>at the
grave.</q><note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 321.</note>
</p>

<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Imprisonment</note>
In later Babylonian times we have a reference to imprisonment
arising out of a case of guarantee.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 281.</note> The priest
of Shamash at Sippara had put A in prison in fetters; B,
a fellow-official of his of the same standing, bails him out,
giving guarantee to the priests and <foreign rend='italic'>šibûtu</foreign> that A shall
not go away, or if he does, that B will do his work.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assault</note>
A case of assault and forcible entry into a house occurs.<note place='foot'>Cyr.
328, 329.</note> But the tablet is so defective that we cannot make out the
rights of the case. The superintendent of the city Shaḫrin,
in the eighth year of Cyrus complained to the priest of
Shamash at Sippara, to the following effect: He had taken
into his house, as a prisoner, a certain man A. He pleads
that he is uncle to the priest and chief magistrate of the
city. Why then has the priest raised his hand over him?
Further, seven men, who are armed, have burst in his door
and entered his house and taken a mina of gold. Whether
this was a rescue by relatives of the prisoner, or by order
of the priest, does not appear. As a result of this complaint,
the elders of the city were assembled and depositions
made. Beyond the plea on the part of the house-breakers
that someone had paid them to break in the door, and that
the prisoner A was someone's pledge, we get no further
information.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tempting a slave to desert</note>
A case of procuration of desertion, forbidden by the
Code<note place='foot'>§ 15.</note> under pain of death, was condoned by the injured
party.<note place='foot'>Dar. 207.</note> A caused a maid of B's to leave her master's
house. B received her back, pardoned A, and took no money of
him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adultery and its punishment</note>
Adultery was punished in the Code by drowning.<note place='foot'>§ 129.</note> The
Code in this and similar cases of sexual irregularity is
explicit that the case must be flagrant. Suspicion was not
enough.<note place='foot'>§ 132.</note> But conduct leading to scandal had to be atoned
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
for by submission to the ordeal. The Code did not take a
higher ground than public opinion. The private contracts
name death as punishment for adultery. Usually it is
drowning, but being thrown from a high place, temple,
tower, or pillar is named. In the later contracts death
was still the penalty for a wife's adultery, but the penalty
had ceased to be drowning only. The adulteress might be
put to the sword.<note place='foot'>Z. A., iii., p. 78.</note>
</p>

<p>
A woman's procuring her husband's death, for love of
another, was punished by impalement.<note place='foot'>§ 153.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The punishment of incest</note>
Incest on the part of a man with his own daughter involved
his banishment.<note place='foot'>§ 154.</note> Incest with a daughter-in-law, if
she was his son's full wife, was apparently punished by
his being drowned. The Code is obscure here and we are
not sure whether she was drowned also.<note place='foot'>§ 155.</note> If the girl
was not yet fully married, the case was treated as one
of ordinary seduction, and the culprit was fined half a
mina.<note place='foot'>§ 156.</note>
</p>

<p>
If a man committed incest with his own mother, both
were burned.<note place='foot'>§ 157.</note> If a man had intercourse with his
foster-mother, or step-mother, who had borne children to his
father, he was disinherited.<note place='foot'>§ 158.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IX. The Family Organization</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sources of information</note>
Marriage is the bond which unites the different members
of the family. The married pair, their children, slaves, and
adjuncts, one side or the other, constitute the family unit.
The Sumerian laws presuppose marriage; but, so far as
known, merely attached penalties to repudiation of the
wedded ties. The Code is very full and explicit and forms
the basis of all our knowledge. The contemporary documents
extend it in some particulars. In Assyrian times we
know little or nothing about the laws concerning marriage.
In later Babylonian times very little is known until the
Persian period, when we have many illustrations. But
what we know, or can gather from scattered hints, makes
it clear that the state of things represented in the Code
remained practically unchanged for the whole period.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The marriage-contract and its obligations</note>
The Code is explicit that a woman was not a wife without
<q>bonds.</q><note place='foot'>§ 128.</note> This was a marriage-contract; of which the
essentials were that the names of the parties and their lineage
were given, the proper consents obtained and the declaration
of the man that he has taken so-and-so to wife inserted.
As a rule, stringent penalties are set down for a repudiation
of the marriage-tie. In these bonds a man might be required
to insert the clause that his wife was not to be held
responsible for any debts he might have incurred before
marriage. The Code enacts that such a clause shall be held
to act both ways; if it is inserted, then the man shall
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
not be liable for his wife's debts before marriage.<note place='foot'>§ 157.</note> But,
if no such bond existed, the wedded pair were one body as far
as liability for debt was concerned, by whichever it had
been contracted and, in spite of such a bond, both were
liable together for all debts contracted after marriage.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Family relations</note>
The family relationship was of primary importance.
Whatever may be said about traces of matriarchy in Babylonia,
we have no legal documents which recognize the institution.
The father is the head of the family and possesses
full power over his wife and family. But the woman
is not in that degraded condition in which marriage by
capture, or purchase, left her. She was a man's inferior in
some respects, but his helper and an honorable wife.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ancient <foreign rend='italic'>gentes</foreign></note>
Not only was the family, which consisted of the wedded
pair and their dependents, a unit, but there was also a connection
with ancestors and posterity which enlarged the
family to a clan or <foreign rend='italic'>gens</foreign>. In this sense it often
appears. The family thus constituted had definite rights over its members.
It was very important to a man to be sure of his family
connection. We may note the importance attached at all
epochs to a man's genealogy as distinguishing his individuality.
His family identified him. There was a very large
number of well-marked and distinguished families, which
took their names from a remote ancestor. So far as our
evidence goes, these ancestors were by no means mythical,
but actually lived in the time of the first dynasty of Babylon.
To all appearances they date back <q>to the Conquest.</q>
Unfortunately no attempt has yet been made to work out
the family histories. But men of such families were the
<foreign rend='italic'>mâr bânê</foreign>, or <q>sons of ancestors,</q> and had special
privileges, which continually emerge into notice. We may compare
the hundred families of China and the patricians of many
nations. There were other families of scarcely less antiquity
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
and consideration. They do not name their ancestor, but
refer to him as a tradesman. They were sons of <q>the
baker,</q> of <q>the measurer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>et cetera</hi>, with which we may
compare our proper names Baker and Lemesurier. There
was a court of ancestry, <foreign rend='italic'>bît mâr bânûti</foreign>, which
investigated questions arising from claims to belong to such families
and which doubtless preserved in its archives the genealogical
lists of these exclusive families. They must have
registered the birth of all fresh members and all adoptions;
for men were adopted freely into such families.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Guilds of working-men</note>
It is not clear whether all members of a family which
traced descent, real or putative, from a trade-father, actually
carried on that trade. If so, we should have examples of a
workmen's guild. Certainly many men who carried on a
trade were <q>sons</q> of the trade-father, but apparently not
all. The Code notes the adoption of a child by an artisan
who teaches him his trade. In certain cities the trades had
their quarters. We read of the <q>city of the goldsmiths</q>
in Nineveh.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their rivals</note>
It may well be that these guilds were close corporations
at first and continued so to be in the less crowded trades,
but rivals outside the guild also came to be tolerated. The
slaves were artisans in great numbers and their increase
may have led to the decay of the old artisan guilds of free
workers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Public registration of family events</note>
The importance of descent was not a sentimental matter
only. The laws of inheritance involved a careful distinction
between proper heirs and a variety of claimants.
Hence it seems likely that there was a registration of births,
deaths, and marriages, at least covering the patrician families.
We have such examples as a man claiming to be of
same father as another, claiming brotherhood. The other
repudiates the claim.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 69.</note> The tablet is too fragmentary
for us
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
to follow the arguments. The slave Bariki-ilu claimed to
be a <foreign rend='italic'>mâr bânû</foreign> and his claim was heard before the court of
the <foreign rend='italic'>mâr bânê</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Z. A., iii., p. 87
f.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Entailed family property</note>
Further, as the wife's marriage-portion, if she died childless,
went back to the <q>house of her father,</q> and as a man
who died without issue had to leave his property to his
<q>father's house,</q> and as many had only a life-interest in
their property, while the family usually had a right of pre-emption
in the case of proposed sales, we see that the family
always had a strong hold over property. Not only was it
for the man's interest to be registered as of a certain family,
but it was also for the family's interest to register all its
members.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Responsibilities of family to its individual members</note>
There are suggestions that the family assumed certain responsibilities
over the man; for in Assyria it appears that
the family might come forward and liberate a man from his
debt. A free man, who had been sold as a slave to Ashnunnak,
and who escaped to Babylon, after five years, being
claimed as a slave by the levy-masters there, chose to serve
his father's house. His brothers swore by Marduk and
Ammiditana the king, making an irrevocable declaration
that as long as he lived he should take up the duties of his
father's house with his
brothers.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 419.</note>
In the later Babylonian
times, the head of the family, though only a distant relation,
was called upon to act as judge in a dispute concerning the
disposition of property.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>X. Courtship And Marriage</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Amount of the bride-price</note>
The suitor came with presents to the parents of the
girl. Most writers see in this a survival of the purchase
of the bride. The name of this gift, <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign>, is
undoubtedly connected with the name of the bride,
<foreign rend='italic'>marḫitu</foreign>. This
present, or bride-price, differed greatly with the circumstances
of the parties. Both money and slaves were given,
but a simple sum of money was more common. In cases
where the bride was rich or highly placed the amount seems
less. A very usual amount was ten shekels, but we have
examples from one shekel up to three minas.<note place='foot'>S. 34.</note> The Code
assessed it at one mina of silver for a patrician and a third
of a mina for a plebeian.<note place='foot'>§ 139.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its disposal</note>
Without this bride-price the young man could not take a
wife. Hence it was expressly secured to him by the Code,
if his father died before he was of age to marry, and reserved
as a first charge on the father's estate. There is
some evidence that a woman might make this present to her
future husband. But that may have been because he was
too poor to make it himself and she found him the means.
As a rule, the parents gave this money to the bride. But
we are not in a position to say whether they did so at once,
on the consummation of the marriage, or on the birth of a
child. The suggestion that it was her <foreign rend='italic'>Morgengabe</foreign> remains
without support. Certain it is that it was not returned
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
always. In the contracts it seems to be given to the bridegroom
with the bride. On a wife dying without children,
the husband was bound to return her marriage-portion to
her family. But if the bride-price which he had given for
her had not been returned to him, he could deduct its value.
On a divorce, he was bound to let his wife have not only her
marriage-portion, but the bride-price paid back to him. If
there had been none, he must give her a fixed sum instead
of it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its presentation</note>
From the phrase-books we may gather that there was a
sort of ceremony about presenting the bride-price to the
father: it was placed on a salver and brought in before the
parents.<note place='foot'>V. R., 24, 48.</note> This was probably a part of the
ceremony of betrothal. </p>

<p>
If the father rejected the suitor, he was bound to return
the bride-price offered.<note place='foot'>§ 160.</note> A curious section of the Code
enacts that if the suitor's comrade intrigued to break off the
match, he was excluded from marrying the girl himself.<note place='foot'>§ 161.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalty for breach of promise</note>
If, after he had brought in the bride-price to his prospective
father-in-law, the suitor took a fancy to another girl,
he might withdraw from the suit. But he then forfeited
what he had offered. If this really was the result of having
taken a dislike to a plain girl, we may suppose that
such a maiden might accumulate several bride-prices and so
acquire some wealth. This may explain Herodotus's idea
that the handsome girls made a dowry for the plain ones.
But there is not a shred of evidence for their doing so in
the way he suggests. A girl was a virgin when she was
married.<note place='foot'>§ 156.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Preliminaries of marriage</note>
Of interest in the later Babylonian texts is the fact that
the preliminaries of the marriage are more fully illustrated.
Thus we read of the wedding of the daughter of Neriglissar:<note place='foot'>Nergl.
1.</note> Nabû-shum-ukîn, the <foreign rend='italic'>êrib bîti</foreign>
of Nabû, judge of Êzida,
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
spoke to the King Neriglissar, saying thus: <q>Give to me
Gigîtum, your young daughter, to wife.</q> The tablet has
only preserved a few lines, from which we cannot be sure
that the marriage took place. The tablet was called a
duplicate of Êzida, showing that it was preserved in the
Nabû temple at Borsippa.
</p>

<p>
The following case is one of the clearest:<note place='foot'>Nbn. 243.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Negotiation of a father for his son</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Nabû-nâdin-aḫi, son of Bêl-aḫê-iddin, grandson of Ardi-Nêrgal,
spoke thus to Shûm-ukîn, son of Mushallimu, saying: <q>Give me thy
daughter, Ina-Esaggil-banat, the maiden, to wife, for Uballitsu-Gula,
my son.</q> Shûm-ukîn listened to him and gave his maiden daughter,
Ina-Esaggil-banat to Uballitsu-Gula, his son. He gave also one
mina of silver, three female slaves named, and house furniture, with
Ina-Esaggil-banat, his daughter, as a marriage-portion to Nabû-nâdin-aḫi.
Nanâ-kishirat, the maid of Shûm-ukîn in lieu of two-thirds
of a mina of silver, her full price, Shûm-ukîn gave to Nabû-nâdin-aḫi
out of the one mina of silver for her marriage-portion.
The deficiency, one-third of a mina of silver, Shûm-ukîn will give
Nabû-nâdin-aḫi, and then her marriage-portion is paid. Each took
a writing.
</quote>

<p>
Here the father negotiates for his son. There is no evidence
of any bride-price being paid. But the examples of
this kind of document are too few for us to establish any
fixed conclusions. In the following case something very
like it appears.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 101.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Negotiation with a mother for her daughter</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Dâgil-ilâni, son of Zambubu, spoke thus to Ḥammâ, daughter of
Nêrgal-iddin, son of Babûtu, saying: <q>Give me thy daughter,
Latubashinni, she shall be my wife.</q> Ḥammâ listened to him and
gave him her daughter, Latubashinni, to wife; and Dâgil-ilâni, in
the joy of his heart, gave to Ḥammâ for Latubashinni, her daughter,
Ana-eli-bêli-âmur, a maid, for half a mina of silver and a mina and a
half of silver to boot. The day that Dâgil-ilâni shall take a second
wife, Dâgil-ilâni shall give Latubashinni a mina of silver and she
shall go back where she was before. With the cognisance of Shûm-iddin,
son of Ina-êšhi-eter, son of Sin-damaku.
</quote>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
Here the man himself negotiates. The mother gives the
bride. Whether he really buys her is hard to say. The
mother may have adopted the girl to care for her old age,
as was often done. The bridegroom may have compensated
the mother with means to adopt another daughter. What
<foreign rend='italic'>locus standi</foreign> Shûm-iddin had is not clear. He may have
been the real father of the bride and so had to be satisfied
that she was fairly treated by the change in her position.
Or his consent to the bridegroom's alliance may have been
needed. The penalty set down for divorce is not high and
the bride was probably poor; we see she was portionless.
In other cases it was as high as six minas of silver.<note place='foot'>Cyr.
183, B. A. S., iv., p. 7.</note> Occasionally
the deed of marriage also named a penalty for
adultery on the part of the wife.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rôle of the contracting parties</note>
Women were given in marriage. The suitor for her hand
did not perhaps see her until marriage, but this is not likely,
since he is contemplated by the Code as capable of having
cast his eyes upon another, and so desiring to retreat from
his suit. At any rate, he brought presents to her father,
who accepted or rejected him. There is no hint that
the woman had any choice. The result of this power over
the child's marriage was that conditions might be imposed
on the marriage. The bride might be required to do service
to an existing wife, or to the bridegroom's mother.
Further, the disposal of property was not entirely free after
marriage. It depended upon what the father had laid down
in the marriage-settlement on his daughter. It was strictly
limited to the woman's children, and if there were none it
went back to her father's house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Giving away the bride</note>
In early times, the father usually gives the bride. But in a
great many cases this duty fell on the mother. How this came
about we do not usually know. The father being dead, or
the girl illegitimate, seem the best explanations, as a rule.
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
In the absence of father and mother, the brother as head of
the family assumed the duty. The examples of this are
common enough.<note place='foot'>See pages <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>,
<ref target="Pg163">163</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
For later times also the examples are numerous of the
power of agnates to give in marriage. It may perhaps be
deduced that the children, in these cases, were young.<note place='foot'>B.
A. S., iv., pp. 14-22.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Widows free to dispose of themselves</note>
Women once married, were free to marry again of their
own choice, whether divorced, separated, or widowed. A
betrothed girl, or bride, if her marriage were not yet consummated,
being seduced by her father-in-law, in whose
house she had gone to live, was also free to marry. But it
does not seem that women who were yet virgins could
choose their own husbands. Even princesses were given
in marriage.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Consent of bridegroom's father or guardian
requisite for a legal marriage</note>
The man was not altogether free to marry. The Code
contemplates a boy left by the death of his father too young
to marry. The brothers, when they divided the father's
property, were bound to set aside for him, in addition to his
share of his father's property, a sum for a bride-price, and
take him a wife. It seems probable that men married while
still young and living at home. For the Code contemplates
the bride being brought to live in her father-in-law's house.<note place='foot'>§§
155, 156.</note>
</p>

<p>
In later Babylonian times, at any rate, the son could not
marry without his father's consent. This we learn from a
suit in high life, in the time of Cyrus.<note place='foot'>Cyr.
312.</note> A high official of
the king's, A, brought a suit against B, who was <q>over the
house,</q> before the nobles and the king's judges. A accused
B and C, an official of his house, of having given a tablet of
marriage-contract of D, a sister of C's, to A's son without
A's consent. Put to the oath, B swore that he did not seal
the tablet. Then D was questioned. Then C acknowledged
that he had drawn up and sealed with B's seal the
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
marriage-contract of D to A's son. The judges ordered
D to return to her brother's house. The tablet was to be
broken whenever found. If afterward D should be seen
with A's son, she was to bear the sign of a concubine.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The court of registration</note>
From other examples the conclusion is inevitable that if
a woman desired to be a full and proper wife she had to obtain
the consent of her bridegroom's father. Thus we read:<note place='foot'>Cyr. 307.</note>
<q>The day that the woman A is seen with B he shall bring
her to the wedding-house. If she does not say to the master
of the wedding-house: Send for C, the father of B,
then she shall wear the sign of a concubine.</q> Her mother
was present at the sealing of this agreement. From this we
may deduce that weddings took place at a definite spot,
called the <q>wedding-house.</q> The name was literally <q>house
of the males,</q> or <q>of the named ones,</q> and also house of the
<foreign rend='italic'>mâr bânê</foreign>, or <q>sons of ancestors.</q> It is clear that
this was a registration court where all who had pretensions to ancestry,
or were people of position, were enrolled. One whose name
was found there was a man <q>with a name,</q> also a <q>son of
an ancestor.</q> He was probably registered there at birth,
marriage, and death. The master of that house was a registrar
and evidently could marry people. It was expected
in this case that the woman, if she wished to be properly
married, would send for the bridegroom's father, whose consent
was necessary. Another name for the house was <foreign rend='italic'>bît
pirṣatum</foreign>, the meaning of which is obscure. But as Ishtar
was <foreign rend='italic'>bêlit parṣê</foreign>, the <q>lady of
<foreign rend='italic'>the parṣê</foreign>,</q> we may connect it
also with weddings.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The bride's dowry</note>
We have seen that the <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign>, or present made to the
parents by the suitor before marriage, was usually handed
over to the bride on her going to her husband's house.
There is frequent reference to this essential preliminary.
It had to be carefully laid aside for the young man by his
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
mother or brethren, if he had not married in his father's
lifetime, and was secured to him by law, apart from and
above what might come to him as a share of his father's
property. Otherwise he would suffer loss in having to find
it out of his own pocket, when his married brothers had
been provided with the means during their father's lifetime.
Usually it was an amount of silver, one shekel up to three
minas. In later Babylonian times there is little evidence of
the parents receiving gifts. We now and then find it so.
Thus a man gave a slave and a mina and a half of silver
for his wife to her mother,<note place='foot'>Nbk. 101.</note> but it is not clear
whether or not this was to buy her.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Her marriage-portion</note>
A far more valuable endowment of the bride was her
marriage-portion. If her father was not alive to give it to
her, the duty fell on his heirs, and she had a right to it over
and above her daughter's share of his property. Thus we
find that the brothers, on giving their sister a share, contract
to further endow her if she marries.<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg163">163</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Her trousseau</note>
We have one or two lists that show what might be expected
as a trousseau by a Babylonian bride. One which
illustrates the Code<note place='foot'>§ 182.</note>
extremely well, narrates first what had
been given a notary and <hi rend='italic'>NU-BAR</hi> of Marduk by her father
on her taking her vow and entering the temple of Anunitum.
This was his <q>grant</q> to her and was known by the
same name as the marriage-portion of a bride. It included
half a shekel of gold for a nose-ring (?), two shekels of
silver as a finger-ring, another ring of silver of one shekel,
one <foreign rend='italic'>malumsa</foreign>, three cloaks, three turbans, one small seal
worth five minas, two jewels of unknown character, one
bed, five chairs, five different sorts of things apparently
made of reeds, the concubine Suratum, her step-mother.
Unfortunately many of these renderings are still quite conjectural.
It is interesting to note that the father left to his
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
daughter his concubine, who was probably a slave, and possibly
really the girl's mother. But now this girl is about to
marry and her own mother, Shubultum, at any rate, her
father's full wife, together with her brothers and sisters,
give her all this property and cause it to enter her husband's
house. They had a reversionary right to her property,
since as a votary she could not alienate it from her
family.<note place='foot'>§ 178.</note>
So now they waive their right, as it will after her
marriage pass to her children, if she has any.<note place='foot'>§ 180.</note> So they are
said to <q>give</q> her what her father had already <q>granted</q>
her. Further, they return to her husband the <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign>, of
one-third of a mina of silver, which he had presented to
them.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
10.</note> The marriage-portion could not be reclaimed by the
wife's family at her death if she had children. If she had
none, it went back to her family.<note place='foot'>§§ 162, 163.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nature of the marriage-portion</note>
Another long list, also a <q>grant</q> to a votary, is found
in two documents which contain apparently a complaint of
oppression made to the king. Neither is sufficiently complete
to be decisive as to the purpose of the letters or reports
which are written in the first person. But they are
duplicates as far as they preserve the list and in many other
long phrases. Here is the list:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Four ... of gold, two rings ... each of them one ...
two dishes, carved with <foreign rend='italic'>karakku</foreign>
birds, one dish carved as a lion, whose head is of
<hi rend='italic'>AB</hi> wood, and its border of
<hi rend='italic'>KU</hi> wood, one chair of <hi rend='italic'>KU</hi>
wood, three chairs (of different makes) of <hi rend='italic'>AB</hi> wood, one oil-pot,
<foreign rend='italic'>šalla</foreign>, one oil-pot containing two hundred
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of Carchemish work, one mixing-pot of copper,
one <foreign rend='italic'>dupru kanku</foreign> containing thirty
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>, two <foreign rend='italic'>kundulu</foreign>
of copper, one ... two ..., one for ...
</quote>

<p>
Although this list is full of words of which the meaning is
obscure as yet, one can see the main drift of it, jewelry,
household furniture, pots and pans, and whatever went to
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
the domestic equipment of the house. It is of interest to
note that already Carchemish was celebrated for its
wares.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 19,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 163.</note>
</p>

<p>
With these lists may be compared the Tell-el-Amarna
lists given in transcription, with a few hints at translation,
by Dr. Winckler.<note place='foot'>K. B., v., pp. 390-404.</note>
They are lists of presents sent by a king
of Egypt to a king of Babylon; by Dushratta, King of
Mitanni, to Nimuria, King of Egypt, as the marriage-portion
of his daughter, Taduḫipa, and another list of her
dowry. The greater part of the names of these articles
defy translation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later usage</note>
During the Fourth Dynasty of Babylon, the celebrated
Michaux Stone<note place='foot'>K. B., iv., pp. 78
ff.</note> records the gift of lands by a father to his
daughter on her marriage. From Kassite times we have
a list similar to the above, but not easily translatable. The
supposed examples of dowry in Assyrian times are not really
such. But in the later Babylonian era the marriage-portion
was still given by the father. It bears, however, the name
<foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign>, once reserved for the husband's free gift to his
wife. The <foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign>, in one case, is ten minas of silver,
four maid-servants, house-furniture, and the like.<note place='foot'>Camb.
193.</note> It might include sheep and oxen.<note place='foot'>Nergl.
25.</note> See also the later Babylonian laws about the
marriage-portion.<note place='foot'>Page <ref target="Pg069">69</ref>.</note> A long
list might be made out from these sources of the house-furniture,<note place='foot'>B.
A. S., iv., p. 13 f.</note> but
as before we do not know what half of the terms mean.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Payment of the marriage-portion</note>
There are many examples of receipts given for the marriage-portion
received in full.<note place='foot'>B. V., 19, 100, 122.</note> Sometimes it was merely
promised. It was not always paid promptly. Law C made
a note of this. The father might have promised a portion,
and even given a deed of gift for it to his daughter. But
if his means have diminished he cannot be held to a literal
fulfilment of the promise. He may do what he can. The
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
law adds significantly that <q>father-in-law and son-in-law shall
not oppress one another.</q> We find that actions were frequently
brought to obtain a marriage-portion. We have an
instance where the payment was withheld for nine years.<note place='foot'>Cyr.
143, Camb. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wife's pin-money</note>
A husband might make a settlement on his wife. In the
time of the Code this was called a <foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign>. It had to be
by deed of gift. It might cover income-producing estate
as well as personal property. But it was hers only for life.
She could leave it as she chose among her children of the
marriage, but not to members of her own family.<note place='foot'>§ 171.</note> We
may regard it as pin-money. Her husband's heirs could
not disturb her possession of it as long as she lived. But
she forfeited it, if she married again.<note place='foot'>§ 172.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The period of betrothal</note>
The betrothed maiden did not at once leave her father's
house. This we learn from the Code, which enacts a penalty
on one who should seduce a betrothed maiden living
in her father's house.<note place='foot'>§ 130.</note>
It seems that on both sides betrothal
took place in early life and that the arrangements were in
the hands of the parents. A father was expected to take a
wife for his son.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The wedding-ceremony</note>
Neither the Code nor any contracts throw light upon the
marriage-ceremony, but a tablet published by Dr. Pinches
in the Proceedings of the Victoria Institute, 1892-93, reprinted
as <q><hi rend='italic'>Notes on some recent discoveries in the realm
of Assyriology</hi>,</q> contains certain suggestions.<note place='foot'>Pages
35 ff.</note> It is very fragmentary and in the form of an interlinear translation
from the Sumerian. It is not always clear who are the actors
referred to, but we may perhaps take it that the officiating
ministers, priests, or elders, first placed their hands
and feet against the hands and feet of the bridegroom, then
the bride laid her head on his shoulder and he was made to
say to her: <q>I am the son of nobles, silver and gold shall fill
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
your lap, you shall be my wife, I will be your husband.
Like the fruit of a garden I will give you offspring.</q> Then
there is a wide gap. But in the next column we seem to
have a further part of the wedding-ritual. The officiating
ministers ceremoniously bound sandals on the feet of the
newly wedded pair, gave them a leather girdle (? or strap)
and fastened to it a pouch or purse of silver and gold. The
further ceremony included placing them somewhere in the
desert. Then turning their faces to the sunset and addressing
the man, the minister says: <q>I swear by the great gods
and you may go.</q> He bids him not to put off the garment
of Ea, nor something belonging to Marduk of Eridu.
Then comes a wide gap, but the fourth column seems to
read <q>until you have settled in the house, until you have
reached the city, eat no food and drink no water, taste not
the waters of the sea, sweet waters, bitter waters, the
waters of the Tigris, the waters of the Euphrates, waters
of the well, nor waters of the river, to fly up to heaven
direct not your wings, to burrow in the earth set not your
dwelling. As a hero, the son of his god, let him be pure.</q>
</p>

<p>
The passage is very difficult and much of the rendering
is conjectural, but the point of the address seems to be that
the young man was to go straight home, live with his wife,
and be good, as a true child of God. The first column seems
to be an enumeration of men who are cursed with misfortunes,
for example, <q>one whom his mother brought forth
with weeping,</q> and perhaps forms part of a prayer that
the bridegroom may not ever be like such men. We must
hope some day to find a fuller text and so to determine
the connection of the various columns. But it is difficult
to imagine what else the text can be than part of a wedding-ceremony.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The first home</note>
The young couple did not always set up a house of their
own; they often went to live with the bridegroom's father.
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
This is shown by the penalty fixed by the Code for the seduction
of a daughter-in-law by a father-in-law. The daughter-in-law
was living in his house.<note place='foot'>§ 156.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Monogamy prevalent in early days</note>
In the earlier days monogamy prevailed. A man ordinarily
had one wife. Polygamy, however, was not unknown.
For a variety of reasons men did sometimes have
two wives, but these cases were treated as exceptions. A
man might also have a concubine or a slave-girl to bear
him children. These did not bear legitimate children.
He might adopt them, but was not bound to do so. If a
man married twice, the children of both marriages shared
equally in his possessions; but they did not put their
mothers' marriage-portions into a common fund and divide
that equally. The children of the first wife divided
among themselves their own mother's marriage-portion, and
the children of the second marriage did likewise.<note place='foot'>§ 167.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Polygamy in later times</note>
In Assyrian times there is clear evidence that among the
slaves and serfs, at least, polygamy was fairly common.<note place='foot'>See
on these points <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Deeds and Documents</hi>, iii., p.
385 f.; <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Doomsday Book</hi>, p. 25 f.</note> In
the later Babylonian era polygamy also existed. Wives
might be sisters.<note place='foot'>Camb. 193.</note> We read of a <q>second
wife.</q><note place='foot'>Nbk. 101.</note> But taking
a second wife was held to be a slight upon the first, in
whose marriage-contract the clause was inserted that in
such a case the husband must pay her a mina of silver and
allow her to go back to her father's house. In that case
the man was hardly bigamous. It was a case of divorce,
and perhaps a legal ceremony before judges was also necessary.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Concubinage</note>
A man might form a connection with a woman other
than his wife. A concubine was a free woman, but had not
the status of a wife; nevertheless she might bring with her
a marriage-portion, over which she had the same rights as
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
a legal wife.<note place='foot'>§ 137.</note> She was taken into the same house as the
wife, but she might not rival her. A man's excuse for taking
a concubine was that his wife was childless. He was
not allowed to take a concubine, even if his wife was childless,
if she gave him a maid to bear him children. Only
when the wife was herself childless and would not allow
him a maid, was he allowed to bring a concubine into his
house. This second wife was married to him. She often
seems to have been bound to serve the first wife and treat
her as her mistress. But she had the same rights as a wife.
If she were put away, the husband had to return her marriage-portion,
if she had any. She had the usufruct of
house, field, and goods. She was not deprived of her children,
but had the custody and education of them. When
they entered into possession of their father's property, she
shared with them, taking the same share as a child. Then
she was free to marry again.<note place='foot'>§ 137.</note> It seems that in any case,
the children of a concubine were full children and with the same
standing as the children of the first wife. The father might
dower his daughter for a concubine; she then had no claim
to share with her brothers and sisters at his death.<note place='foot'>§ 183.</note> But,
if her father had given her no marriage-portion, her brothers
must give her one at the division of his property.<note place='foot'>§ 184.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The maid as the wife of her master</note>
The case was different with the maid&mdash;a slave who by
her mistress's consent bore children to her master. She
was still a slave and if she rivalled her mistress, or was impertinent
to her, she could be put back again among the
slaves; perhaps even branded. But, if she had borne children,
she was not to be sold as a slave. At the death of her
master she was free. Her children by him were free in any
case. If her master were so minded, he might make them
full sons by verbal acknowledgment. It was enough to
say, <q>my sons.</q> But that he had done so probably had to
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
be proved by a witness. A family unacknowledged by the
father would on his death have only a mother. In such a
family the mother was the obvious ruler. We must be on
our guard against mistaking her position, or that of the
concubine above, for examples of matriarchy. If she was
pledged for debt, she could not be sold, she must be bought
back.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marriages and inheritance among slaves</note>
That a slave usually was married to a slave-girl with his
master's consent and even by his direction is quite the rule.
Masters even went so far as to buy a slave-girl to be wife
to a slave. There is no reason to think that the master did
not respect the slave's matrimonial rights. But the slave's
wife was not always owned by the slave's master. Sometimes
she was owned by a different master, or was free.
There was no especial disgrace attaching to becoming the
wife of a slave. A free woman might not only marry a
slave, but bring with her a marriage-portion, as if she had
married in her own rank. The man had no ancestral property,
he was <q>a son of no one.</q> Hence when he died all
the property to be divided consisted of what the married
couple had acquired together, and the wife's marriage-portion.
To the latter she had full and unquestioned right.
The master was his slave's heir. So the property which
the pair had acquired during their married life was divided
into two equal portions. The master took one half, the wife
the other for herself and her children. The children were
all free. When both father and mother were slaves, so
were the children. There was no property then for the
slave-children to inherit.<note place='foot'>§ 176.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Data from the contracts</note>
Some further evidence from the contracts is worth noting
here. Documents relating to marriage are not very common
and may have owed their presence in the archives to
some peculiarity in their form. Some are perhaps rather a
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
memorandum that the proper formalities have been complied
with. Thus<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 88.</note> we read that <q>A has taken to wife B,
the daughter of C, from C and D his wife, and has paid ten
shekels as <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign> to C, her father.</q> The rest is
lost. If it only laid down the penalties for infidelity on either side,
this was quite normal.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fatherless girls</note>
Whenever the mother alone appears, as giving her
daughter in marriage, we may suspect that the father was
dead, or the mother divorced. When the mother is a
votary, we know that such a person was not entitled to
have a daughter at all, and hence we are not surprised that
the <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign> offered for the girl is small,
five shekels<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 617.</note> or
even one shekel.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 92.</note>
So the penalty laid upon the man for
divorcing such a wife is only ten shekels.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 90.</note> On the other
hand if she was unfaithful she was to be drowned.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 90.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The marriage of votaries</note>
Very singular are the cases in which a votary marries.
We know from the Code that this sometimes took place;
but the votary seems to have been expected, though married,
to keep her vow of virginity. In one case we read
that a woman first devotes her daughter, <foreign rend='italic'>ullilši</foreign>,
then marries her, and declares at the same time that she is vowed,
<foreign rend='italic'>ellit</foreign>, and that no one has any claim on
her.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 366.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Power of agnates</note>
<note place='margin'>Marriage of a king's daughter</note>
In some cases a sister had the power to give her sister in
marriage, with the declaration that no one has any claim
on her.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
394.</note> We may imagine the sisters orphans, without
brothers. The name of their father is, however, given;
and his sons and daughters are mentioned. It seems to be
closely parallel to the case of the marriage of a king's
daughter<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
193.</note> where a sister also gives a sister in marriage.
Here Elmeshu, daughter of the king Ammiditana, is given
in marriage by Zirtum, also daughter of king Ammiditana,
on the order of her brother, Shumum-libshi. The bridegroom
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
was Ibku-Anunitum, son of Shamash-limir and
Taram-shullim, his wife. The parents paid for their son
only four shekels as <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign>, which Shumum-libshi and
Zirtum received. If the bridegroom repudiated his bride, he
had to pay half a mina. It is not clear what penalty the
bride had to pay if she repudiated her husband. This is
dated in the reign of Ammiditana; but in which year of
his reign does not appear, as the traces of the year-name do
not agree with any in the Chronicle. It must then have
fallen somewhere between the seventh and the twenty-second
years. Hence the father of the princess was alive
at the time. Why had he no hand in the marriage? The
history of the reign is not very well known. Perhaps he
was away from home. His son and successor, Ammizaduga,
whom we may imagine to have been the eldest son, does
not appear in the case. Perhaps he also was away. But it
is remarkable that the king never does directly take part in
any contract. That is probably due to his sacred character.
The young princess was not treated with overmuch
consideration, judging by the smallness of her dowry.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marriage of two sisters to one man</note>
We have a very singular case in the marriage of two sisters
to one man. This has already been translated and
commented upon by Meissner,<note place='foot'>A. P., 89.</note>
Pinches,<note place='foot'>J. R. A. S. 97, pp. 407 ff.</note>
and Sayce.<note place='foot'>B. A. L., p. 27 f.</note> It
is, however, too important to omit here. There are two
tablets concerned with it.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
21 and B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2176
A.</note> The first is the contract between
the husband and his wives. We may render it thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Ardi-Shamash took to wife Taram-Saggil and Iltâni, daughters of
Sin-abushu. If Taram-Saggil and Iltâni say to Ardi-Shamash, their
husband, <q>You are not my husband,</q> one shall throw them down
from the <hi rend='italic'>AN-ZAG-GAR-KI</hi>; and if Ardi-Shamash shall say to
Taram-Saggil and Iltâni his wives, <q>You are not my wives,</q> he shall
leave house and furniture. Further, Iltâni shall obey the orders of
Taram-Saggil, shall carry her chair to the temple of her god. The
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
provisions of Taram-Saggil shall Iltâni prepare, her well-being she
shall care for, her seal she shall not appropriate (?).
</quote>

<p>
Then follow ten witnesses, but no date.
</p>

<p>
The second document seems to be drawn up rather from
the point of view of the sisters. We may render it thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Iltâni, the sister of Taram-Saggil, Ardi-Shamash, son of Shamash-ennam,
took to wife, from Uttatum, their father. Iltâni shall prepare
the provisions of her sister, shall care for her well-being, shall
carry her chair to the temple of Marduk. The children which she
has borne, or shall bear, shall be their children. [If Taram-Saggil]
shall say to Iltâni, her sister, <q>you are not my sister</q> [the penalty
is lost]. [If Iltâni shall say to Taram-Saggil her sister], <q>You are
not my sister,</q> one shall brand her, and sell her. If Ardi-Shamash
shall say to his wife, <q>You are not my wife,</q> he shall pay one mina
of silver; and if they say to Ardi-Shamash their husband, <q>You are
not our husband,</q> one shall tie them up and throw them into the river.
</quote>

<p>
Here there are eleven witnesses, but again no date.
</p>

<p>
Meissner deduces from the mention of children that
Taram-Saggil was already married. The exact relation between
the sisters is not clear. In one case they seem to be
daughters of Uttatum, in the other of Sin-abushu. Or it
may be that Iltâni alone was daughter of Sin-abushu. If
so, perhaps Uttatum had adopted her. Sayce clearly
thinks so. But they might be daughters of the same
mother by different fathers, one of whom is mentioned in
one case, the other in the other. Or they might really be
children of Sin-abushu, if their mother afterwards married
Uttatum, who was thus their step-father. It is clear that
Iltâni was to wait on her sister, and, if she repudiated her,
was to be treated as a slave. This is exactly parallel to
the status of the slave-maid, whom a wife or votary in the
Code<note place='foot'>§ 146.</note> provided for her husband. Perhaps Taram-Saggil
had become a chronic invalid. A comparison of the two
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
texts is interesting in other respects. The penalties differ
curiously. If Ardi-Shamash repudiates his wives, in one
case, he loses house and furniture; in the other case, he
pays one mina. Was one the penalty for repudiating
Taram-Saggil, the other for repudiating Iltâni? But if
they repudiate him, the penalties are different in the two
documents, unless indeed the <hi rend='italic'>AN-ZAG-GAR-KI</hi> be an ideogram
for the <q>steep place</q> from which they were to be
thrown into the water.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marriage with attached conditions</note>
Marriages are not infrequent which impose conditions
upon the husband and wife with relation to outside parties.
Thus a mother gives her daughter in marriage to a man,
on condition that she shall continue to support her mother
as long as she lives. In this case, if the husband put away
his wife, he was to pay one mina of silver; while, if she
hated her husband, she was to be thrown from a pillar,
<foreign rend='italic'>dimtu</foreign>.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 407.</note> This pillar may be the real meaning of the
<hi rend='italic'>AN-ZAG-GAR-KI</hi>, which looks very like an attempt to express
<foreign rend='italic'>zigguratu</foreign>, a tower, in an ideographic way. A very similar
case is where a lady takes a girl to be wife to her son
but stipulates that the wife shall treat her as mistress.
If she shall say to her mother-in-law, <q>Thou art not my
mistress,</q> she shall be branded and sold. As long as the
mother lives, they two together shall support
her.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 707.</note> One
may suspect that such maternal power, as is here shown over
the children, arises from their having been adopted by their
mother in order to provide for her in her old age. This
was often done. The children may have been slaves before
adoption. In the second case, the mother leaves her son all
she has, or may acquire.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XI. Divorce And Desertion</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Early regulations regarding divorce</note>
Divorce is regulated by the Code. The Sumerian laws
seem to regard the marriage-tie as dissoluble on the part
of the man by an act of simple repudiation, accompanied
by a <foreign rend='italic'>solatium</foreign>, fixed at half a mina. The wife, however,
was punished by death for repudiating her husband.<note place='foot'>Law VI.</note> The
Code limits the facility of divorce for the man and renders
it possible for the woman to obtain.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of a divorced wife</note>
Divorce of either a wife or concubine involved her being
given a maintenance. The divorced wife had the custody
of her children, if any. They were not disinherited by the
divorce. The divorced woman retained the marriage-portion
which she had brought to the home. She had a
share with her children in the divorced husband's property
at his death. If he married again, the children of both
marriages shared equally. She was also free to marry
again, but apparently not until her children had come into
their share of the late husband's property, therefore not
during his life.<note place='foot'>§ 137.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Grounds of divorce</note>
Divorce was permitted on the ground of childlessness.
The husband gave back to his wife all her marriage-portion.
Also he had to give the bride-price which he had paid to
her parents during his courtship, and which they had returned
to him, as a rule, on marriage.<note place='foot'>§ 138.</note> If this bride-price
had not been given, then he paid her a fixed sum of money;
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
one mina, if he was a patrician, a third, if he was only a
plebeian.<note place='foot'>§§ 139, 140.</note> A slave does not seem to have had the
liberty of divorce.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Protection of the wife's rights</note>
The wife might take a dislike to her husband and set
her face to leave him and deny him conjugal rights. This
was probably equivalent to desertion. Then a judicial
inquiry was required. If his ill treatment or neglect was
made clear and she was blameless, a divorce was granted.
She took her marriage-portion and went back to her
family. But as this was of her own seeking, she received
no alimony.<note place='foot'>§ 142.</note>
It is assumed that it was an unhappy marriage
from the first and that there were no children.
</p>

<p>
If it were proved that she was a bad wife, she was
treated as an adulteress and drowned.<note place='foot'>§
143.</note> On the other hand,
even if she were a bad wife, the husband might repudiate
her simply without paying any price for divorce. In this
case there was no suspicion of her infidelity. Or the husband
might degrade her to the position of a slave.<note place='foot'>§ 141.</note> There
is no mention in these cases of a return to her father's
house.
</p>

<p>
Chronic illness on the part of a wife was not a ground
for divorce. The husband had to maintain her. He might,
however, take a second wife.<note place='foot'>§
149.</note> If she did not care to remain
in his house in such conditions, she could leave him, take
her marriage-portion and return to her family.<note place='foot'>§ 150.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Illustrations from the contracts</note>
We have already seen that the Code regulates the questions
arising out of divorce.<note place='foot'>§§ 136-40.</note> The examples at this period
are but few. In one case a man put away his wife and
she received her price of divorce. It is expressly stated
that she may marry another man and her former husband
will not complain.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 91.</note>
This document is, however, little more
than an agreement to abide by the terms of the divorce.
</p>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<p>
In another case a marriage-contract names the penalty a
man shall pay for divorcing his wife.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 90.</note> In all these cases the word for divorce,
<foreign rend='italic'>ezêbu</foreign>, is literally <q>to put away.</q> But
a man divorced his wife by the simple process of saying,
<q>You are not my wife.</q> He then paid her a fine, returned
her marriage-portion and so on, as laid down in the Code.<note place='foot'>§ 138.</note>
It was far harder for a woman to secure a divorce from her
husband. She could do so, however, but only as the result
of a lawsuit.<note place='foot'>§ 142.</note> As a rule, the marriage-contracts mention
death as her punishment, if she repudiates her husband.
The death by drowning is usually named. This was in accordance
with Law V. of the Sumerian Code.
</p>

<p>
We may regard repudiation of husband and wife, one by
the other, and desertion as leading to divorce; and therefore
these may be appropriately considered next.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Involuntary desertion</note>
Desertion of a wife by her husband might be involuntary.
The Code deals with the case of a man captured by the
enemy. If the wife were left at home well provided for,
she was bound to be true to her absent husband. If she
entered another man's house, she was condemned to death
as an adulteress.<note place='foot'>§
133.</note> But if she was not provided for, she
might enter another man's house without blame.<note place='foot'>§ 134.</note> There
she might bear children. But, if so, she yet had to go back
to her original husband on his return. The children she
had borne in his absence were to be counted to their real
father.<note place='foot'>§ 135.</note>
That the law provides for such cases points to
the existence of frequent wars, in which fortune was not
always on the side of Babylonia.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Voluntary desertion</note>
But the husband might desert his wife voluntarily.
Then, if she was left unprovided for, the wife might enter
another man's house. The errant husband, when he returned,
could not reclaim his wife.<note place='foot'>§ 136.</note>
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
We have a legal decision in a case<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 2474.</note> where a man had
deserted his wife for twenty years and <q>left her to her
fate, did not love her.</q> During this time a daughter,
whether real or adoptive we are not told, took care of her
mother. To her the mother left property, among other
things, a slave. The mother being dead, the truant husband
returned and claimed the slave from the daughter. He was
nonsuited.
</p>

<p>
Among the provocations which gave the wife cause for
divorce was the <q>going out</q> of the husband, probably a
euphemism for adultery on his part. Belittling his wife was
another ground for her complaint. What this means is not
quite clear, but we may regard it as persistent neglect.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XII. Rights Of Widows</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The authority of the widow in the home</note>
The Code makes clear what was the position of the widow.
She had a right to stay on in her husband's house until she
died,<note place='foot'>§ 172.</note> but was not
compelled to do so.<note place='foot'>§ 173.</note> If she remained,
she was the head of the family. To her the young sons
looked to furnish them with means to court a wife, and the
daughters for a marriage-portion. She acted in these
matters with the consent and assistance of her grown-up
children. But she might elect to leave the home and remarry.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of inheritance</note>
As long as she remained in her husband's home she enjoyed
to the full whatever she had brought there as a marriage-portion,
whatever her husband had settled upon her,
and also received a share from her husband's goods at his
death. The widow's share was the same as a child's. But
she had no power to alienate any of these possessions. The
Code expressly declares that they were her children's
after her.<note place='foot'>§ 171.</note>
The children had no power to turn her out. If
they desired her to leave, the matter came before the law-courts,
and her private wishes were consulted. If she
wished to remain, she might do so, and the judge bound
over the children to allow her to do so.<note place='foot'>§ 172.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later usages</note>
A very clear example of the permanence of the Code
regulations on this subject meets us in the fifth year of
Cambyses.<note place='foot'>Camb. 273.</note>
Ummu-tâbat, daughter of Nabû-bêl-usur, wife
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
of Shamash-uballiṭ, son of Bêl-ebarra, a Shamash priest, who
was dead, whose sons were Shamash-eṭir, Nidittum, and
Ardi-Ḥar, swore to Bêl-uballiṭ, priest of Sippara, saying, <q>I
will not remarry, I will live with my sons, I will bring up
my sons to manhood, until they are numbered with the
people.</q> On the day that Ummu-ṭâbat remarries, according
to her bond, the property [of her late husband] which
is in the possession of Bêl-uballiṭ, the priest of Sippara, [she
shall forfeit]. The tablet is defective here, but on the
edge of the tablet we see that the care of her sons was
given her. To remarry is expressed here by the words,
<q>going into the <foreign rend='italic'>bît zikari</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Remarriage of a widow</note>
A widow could remarry at her discretion. She no longer
had to be given in marriage. She was free to marry the
man of her choice.<note place='foot'>§ 172.</note>
She might take with her her marriage-portion
to her new home, but she had to leave behind any
settlement which her former husband had given her, or any
share of his goods that had come to her at his death. Her
family were not called upon to find any fresh marriage-portion
for her. But she was not completely mistress of
even her marriage-settlement. If she had children of the
former marriage, they and any children of her second marriage
shared her marriage-portion equally. Only she had
the enjoyment of it for life.<note place='foot'>§ 173.</note>
If there were no children of the second marriage,
those of the first took all she left.<note place='foot'>§ 174.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disposal of her first husband's property</note>
We have assumed that when her husband died her
children were old enough to care for themselves. If they
were not, she had no power to enter upon a second marriage
and desert her first family. She was not free to marry at
all without consent of the law-court.<note place='foot'>§
177.</note> But there is no evidence
that this could be withheld, if proper conditions were
observed. The first husband's property was inventoried and
consent for the second marriage being granted, she and her
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
new husband were bound by deed to preserve the whole
estate of the late husband for his children. With that proviso,
the newly married pair entered into full use of the
deceased's property and were bound to educate the children
until grown up. They had no inducement to neglect them,
as in any case none of the deceased's property could ever be
theirs. If the children died, it would all revert to the family
of the deceased. The newly married pair had no further
interest in it than the enjoyment of it until the children
could manage for themselves. They could not alienate any
of it. The sale of even a utensil was not possible.<note place='foot'>§ 177.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XIII. Obligations And Rights Of Children</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Absoluteness of the paternal power over the family</note>
It is customary to say that the father had absolute power
over his children, but it is better to state only what is known
with certainty regarding the extent of his power. The
father could treat his child, or even his wife, equally with
a slave, as a chattel to be pledged for his debts.<note place='foot'>§ 117.</note> We may
therefore conclude that he could sell his child. An actual
example cannot be cited from early times, but they are very
common later.
</p>

<p>
The son was not capable of entering into an independent
contract with an outside person.<note place='foot'>§ 7.</note> We may assume that
this means simply while yet living in his father's house.
The father had rights over what his son earned. A man
could also hire out his child and take the wages.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., p. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His power of preference</note>
The father had the right to prefer one son above the rest.
He could endow him with house, field, and garden. But
this must be done in his lifetime and by written deed. This
gift did not in any way affect the son's claim to inherit
equally with his brethren on the father's death, when he
took a full share over and above what he had by gift.<note place='foot'>§ 165.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His control of his daughters</note>
The father had full power to dispose of his daughters in
marriage. But he was expected to furnish them with a
marriage-portion. This was not obligatory, being probably
a matter of negotiation with the parents of the bridegroom.
In later times the obligation evidently became irksome and
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
oppressive, and Law E was passed to relieve the strain.
A father was bound to do his best to fulfil his promise to
dower his daughter, but no more. A father could not
hinder his daughter from becoming a votary.<note place='foot'>§
178.</note> If he approved her choice,
he might give her a portion, as if for
marriage,<note place='foot'>§ 179.</note>
but he was not compelled to do so. A father
could give his daughter to be a concubine.<note place='foot'>§ 183.</note>
</p>

<p>
The father's consent was also needed to his son's marriage.<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg127">127</ref>.</note>
He had to provide the youth with a bride-price,
and secure a wife for him.<note place='foot'>§ 166.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The age of majority</note>
It is not easy to determine when children ceased to be
under the paternal power. Betrothed daughters remained
in their father's house; so did married sons sometimes.
Whether the birth of a child, making the young man himself
a father, freed him as head of a family, or whether
it was entering a house of his own, we cannot yet say.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment of unfilial conduct</note>
The Sumerian laws are very severe upon a child's repudiation
of a father. That degraded him to the status of a
slave. He might also be branded. Obviously he was disinherited.
The repudiation is expressed in the words, <q>You
are not my father,</q> but it may be intended to cover all unfilial
conduct. The Code is more explicit. If a son struck
his father, his hands were cut off.<note place='foot'>§ 195.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disinheritance</note>
The Sumerian laws preserved the father's rights to disinherit
the son by a simple repudiation, saying, <q>You are not
my son.</q> The son then had to leave house and enclosure.
The Code limits this power. It insists on legal process and
good reason alleged. Also it was not allowed for a first
offence on the son's part.<note place='foot'>§ 168.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Relations of mothers and sons</note>
The mother was in much the same position of authority
as the father. A son who repudiated his mother was
branded and expelled from house and city. He was not,
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
however, sold as a slave. The Sumerian laws also reserved
to the mother the right to repudiate her son, and he must
quit house and property. The Code gives no such power to
mothers. Indeed, we find examples of a son disputing with
a mother.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 15.</note>
Mothers took up the father's place toward the
children on the death of the father as regards marriage-portions,
bride-price, and other family affairs. But they usually
acted in concert with the elder children.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Duties to adoptive parents</note>
The repudiation of adoptive parents was a very grievous
sin, especially on the part of those who were children of
parents who were forbidden to have children. Something
worse than illegitimacy was their lot. The penalties of
having the eye torn out, or the tongue cut out,<note place='foot'>§§ 192, 193.</note>
show the abhorrence felt for their ingratitude.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XIV. The Education And Early Life Of Children</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Number and importance of scribes</note>
Much has been made of the knowledge of writing shown
by the Babylonians and Assyrians. The ability to draw up
deeds and write letters seems at first sight to have been
widely diffused. In the times of the First Dynasty of Babylon
almost every tablet seems to have a fresh <foreign rend='italic'>tupšar</foreign>, or
scribe. Many show the handiwork of women scribes.<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg084">84</ref>.</note> But
most of the persons concerned in these documents were of
the priestly rank. There is no evidence that the shepherds
or workpeople could write. In the Assyrian times the
scribe was a professional man. We find <foreign rend='italic'>aba</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>tupšar</foreign>
used as a title. So, too, in later Babylonian times. The
witnesses to a document can only be said to sign their names
in so far as that they impressed their seals. This was done,
at any rate, in early times. In the Assyrian period the
only parties who sealed were the owners of the property
transferred to a new owner. The whole of a tablet shows
the same handwriting throughout. Anyone who reads carefully
through the facsimile copies in <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts</hi> can
readily see this. Different scribes, especially in early times,
wrote differently, but this was still the case in Assyrian
days. Yet no change of hand can be noted anywhere in
one document, save where, as in the forecast tablets, a date
or note was added by a different person, often in Assyrian
script, to a text written in Babylonian. The only safe
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
statement to make is that from the earliest times a very
large number of persons existed, at any rate in the larger
towns, who could write and draw up documents.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sumerian words and expressions in the legal literature</note>
The use of Sumerian terms and phrases in the body of a
document written in Semitic Babylonian might be ascribed
to a mere tradition. But they were no meaningless formulæ.
The many variations, including the substitution of
completely different though synonymous words, show that
these Sumerian phrases were sufficiently understood to be
intelligently used. In later times they either disappear altogether,
or are used with little variation. They had become
stereotyped and were conventional signs, doubtless
read as Semitic, though written as Sumerian. Our own retention
of Latin words is a close parallel. The First Dynasty
of Babylon was bilingual at any rate in its legal documents,
though the letters are all pure Semitic. The earlier
documents show few signs of Semitic origin, though its influence
can be traced as far back as we can go.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Schools</note>
The discovery at Sippara of a school dating from the
First Dynasty of Babylon is very fully worked out by Professor
Scheil in <hi rend='italic'>Une Saison de fouilles à Sippara</hi>, pp. 30-54.
Professor Hilprecht gives further details in <hi rend='italic'>Explorations
in Bible Lands</hi>, pp. 522-28 and <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The methods of learning to write and the lessons in Sumerian
are well described by these authors, and illustrated by
numerous extant examples of practice-tablets. The subjects
were very numerous and included arithmetic, mensuration,
history, geography, and literature. As Dr. Pinches has
shown by his edition of some of these practice-tablets,<note place='foot'>P.
S. B. A., xviii., pp. 250-56; xxiii., pp. 188-210.</note>
these contain very valuable fragments of otherwise lost or
imperfectly known texts.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Apprenticeship</note>
Slaves were often bound as apprentices to learn a trade
or handicraft. A man might adopt a child to teach him his
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
trade, and his duty to him was sufficiently discharged by
doing so.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Naming of children</note>
We do not yet know in any authoritative way, when or
with what ceremonies children were named. In the case of
slaves we have a boy, still at the breast,<note place='foot'>Nbd.
832, Nbk. 67.</note> or a girl of three
months, not named.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 100.</note>
On the other hand, a girl still at the
breast is named. Hence Meissner concludes, that at the
end of one year, at latest, the child was given a name.<note place='foot'>D.
S., p. 24, note.</note> But
the usage with respect to slaves is hardly a rule, and, as
appears from the above, they were not consistently named.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rearing of babies</note>
A child seems often to have been put out to nurse. From
the phrase-book we learn that a father might <q>give a child
to a wet-nurse to be suckled, and give the wet-nurse food
and drink, oil for anointing, and clothing for three years.</q><note place='foot'>II.
R. 9, 28 cd. ff.</note>
That this was not only done with adopted children is clear
from the Code;<note place='foot'>§ 194.</note> where we find a severe penalty laid on a
wet-nurse, who substitutes another child for the one intrusted
to her, without the parents' consent.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Number of children who could read and write</note>
It will hardly do to interpret the phrase-book<note place='foot'>II.
R. 9, 66 cd.</note> as meaning that all children were made to learn writing. But that
this was commonly done is evident from the number, both
of men and women, who could act as scribes.<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg082">82</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XV. Adoption</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Frequency and reasons for adoption</note>
Adoption primarily means a process by which parents
could admit to the privileges of sonship children born of
other parents. There were many reasons which might impel
them to such a course. If they were childless, a natural
desire for an heir might operate. But under the Babylonian
law a man might take a second wife, or a maid, if his wife
were childless, to bear him children. A more operative
cause was that children were a source of profit to their
parents while they remained with them. But it seems that
men married early. Hence this alone does not seem sufficient
to account for the great frequency of adoption. Besides,
in that case, what induced a parent to part with his
child for adoption? It seems that the real cause most often
was that the adopting parents had lost by marriage all their
own children and were left with no child to look after them.
They then adopted a child whose parents would be glad to
see him provided for, to look after them until they died,
leaving him the property they had left after portioning their
own children.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Children who might be adopted</note>
The Code admits all kinds of adoption, but regulates the
custom. A man might adopt an illegitimate son, or the
child of a votary or palace-warder, who had no right to
children, or the child of living parents. In the latter case
alone was the parents' consent necessary. We have examples
of cases of adoption of relatives, of entirely unrelated
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
persons, of a slave even.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
54.</note> We learn from the series <foreign rend='italic'>ana
ittišu</foreign><note place='foot'>II. R. 9, 28 cd. ff.</note>
that a man might take a young child, put it out to
nurse, provide the nurse with food, oil for anointing, and
clothing, for a space of three years; and then have it taught
a trade or profession, such as that of scribe.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The method of procedure</note>
Adoption was effected by a deed, drawn up and sealed
by the adoptive parents, duly sworn to and witnessed.
Such contracts definitely state the relationship, which was
in all respects the same as that of a son born in matrimony.
But it laid down the obligations of the son, while it stipulated
what was the inheritance to which he might expect to
succeed. It brought responsibilities to both parties and
fixed them. The son was bound to do that which a son
would naturally have done, explicitly, to maintain his
parents while they lived. The parents were bound, not
only to leave him property, but to treat him as a son. But,
as a rule, all was matter of contract and carefully set down.
If such a contract was not drawn up, although the adoptive
parents had brought him up, the child must return to his
father's house.<note place='foot'>§ 199.</note>
Only, for an artisan, it was sufficient to
have taught the child his trade.<note place='foot'>§ 188.</note>
</p>

<p>
So far as our examples go, some color might be given to
the suggestion that adoption was always merely for the convenience
of old people who wanted to be taken care of. But
we know that children were adopted on other grounds.
That they were children and not always grown-up men and
women is clear from the above. This we may regard as
adoption pure and simple. Other cases are a legal method
of making provision for old age, or for other purposes for
which an heir as legal representative was desirable. In
the case of no legal heir, the property went back to the
next of kin.
</p>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adoption pure and simple</note>
That such a process did take place in Babylonia is made
clear by the Code.<note place='foot'>§ 185 ff.</note>
But few examples are known where a
father takes into his family an additional child. The case,
in which the son is not only adopted by parents who have
a family living, but is ranked as their eldest son, deserves
reproducing in full.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 95.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Ubar-Shamash, son of Sin-idinnam, from Sin-idinnam, his father,
and Bititum, his mother, have Beltum-abi and Taram-ulmash taken
to sonship, and let him be the son of Beltum-abi and Taram-ulmash.
Ubar-Shamash shall be their eldest son. The day that Beltum-abi,
his father, and Taram-ulmash, his mother, say to Ubar-Shamash, their
son, <q>You are not our son,</q> he shall leave house and furniture. The
day that Ubar-Shamash shall say to Beltum-abi, his father, or Taram-ulmash,
his mother, <q>You are not my father or my mother,</q> one
shall brand him, put fetters upon him, and sell him.
</quote>

<p>
Both parents of the adopted son were living. That the
son is to be reckoned eldest implies that the adopting parents
had other children. This is made clear in one case
where the adoptive parents are expressly said to have five
children.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 98.</note>
In another case where a child is adopted a certain
person is expressly said to be his brother.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Consent of other members of the family involved</note>
The existing members of the family had a real interest
in the proceeding. For, as inheriting with them, the addition
of another son could not but affect their prospects. We
may wonder what influenced them to consent. That they
did consent is clear from the often-occurring covenant by
which they bound themselves not to object. One explanation
may be that they had grown up and left home and
were anxious for the welfare of their parents, but could not
arrange to look after them themselves. Hence for their
parents' sake they were willing to forego their share, or
submit to a stranger taking precedence of them, or in some
cases to give up all claim to the property in their parents'
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
possession in return for being relieved of the responsibility
of looking after them. Of course, when the adopted son
was only taken in as one, even the eldest, among several, he
would only have a share at the parents' death. But it even
seems that the children might of their own motion adopt a
brother to be son to their parents.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 94.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disinheritance of a son</note>
The clause which implies disinheritance in case the parents
repudiate the son, or he repudiates them, could only
be enforced by a law-court.<note place='foot'>§ 168.</note>
But it was nevertheless most
regularly inserted in the contract. In one case the document
merely consists of it,<note place='foot'>M. A. P.,
93.</note> leaving us to infer that an
adopted son was concerned. But this is not absolutely certain.
The son might have been rebellious to his mother,
who was therefore minded to cut him off, and this may be
the result of her bringing her son before the judge. The
judge was bound to try and conciliate the parties.<note place='foot'>§ 168.</note> Hence,
not infrequently the son was bound over not to repeat the
offence on pain of disinheritance, while the mother retained
her right to disinherit. There was no mention of his being
sold for a slave, or branded, as was usual when a son was
adopted and then repudiated his parents.
</p>

<p>
According to the contracts entered into by the parties,
parents could repudiate adopted sons. This was contrary
to the law by which the consent of the judge was needed
for disinheritance. It seems to be an attempt to contract
without the support of the law. The son was then to take
a son's share and go away.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 98.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Form of adoption</note>
The word <foreign rend='italic'>aplûtu</foreign>,
abstract of <foreign rend='italic'>aplu</foreign>, <q>son,</q> and therefore literally
<q>sonship,</q> being also used to denote the relation of a
daughter to a parent, came to denote the <q>share</q> which
a son or daughter received. If a man adopted a son, he
granted him an <foreign rend='italic'>aplûtu</foreign>,
or <q>sonship,</q> and this carried with
it a material property. But the father, while still living,
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
might grant the son his <foreign rend='italic'>aplûtu</foreign> and stipulate for
maintenance during the rest of his life. Such a grant begins with
<foreign rend='italic'>aplûtu ša</foreign> B, where B is the son.
But it by no means follows that
B is an adopted son. The question is only decided for us
when the parentage of B is given. If he is said to be the
<q>son of C,</q> then we know that A giving him <q>sonship</q>
must mean that A adopted him. But if B is merely indicated
as the son of A, we cannot tell whether he was born
to A, or only adopted by A.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Phrases which express the idea</note>
So when the property given to B is in his power to dispose
of later as he may choose, this privilege is expressed by
the words, <q>he may give his sonship to whom he chooses.</q>
The choice is sometimes expressed as <q>that which is good
to his heart,</q> or <q>in his eyes,</q> or <q>whom he loves.</q> A
modified choice is often mentioned, as when it is said that
a votary may leave her <q>sonship</q> after her to whom she
likes <q>among her brothers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Settlements which assume adoption</note>
We have a large number of documents which make reference
to the <foreign rend='italic'>aplûtu</foreign> of a certain person, which we can render
here by <q>heritage.</q> These are especially common on
the part of votaries. As we have seen, they were not supposed
to have children of their own, but possessed the right
to nominate their heir within limits. In return for exercising
this right in favor of a certain person, they usually
stipulated that such person shall maintain them as long as
they live and otherwise care for them. Even outside actual
deeds of heritage, we find references to property derived
from votaries subject to certain duties. Such dispositions
of property are closely related to a will or testament,
but anticipate the death of the testator. They are really
settlements for the future, which exactly answers to the title
given them by the Babylonian scribes, <foreign rend='italic'>ridit warkati</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The following example makes these details
clear:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 565.</note>
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<quote rend='display'>
The heritage of Eli-eriṣa, votary of Shamash, daughter of Shamash-ilu.
Belisunu, votary of Shamash, daughter of Nakarum, is the
caretaker of her future life. One-third <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of unreclaimed land in
Karnamkarum, next the field of Issurîa, one <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> house in Ḥalḫalla,
next the house of Nakarum, one-third <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> four
<hi rend='italic'>GIN</hi> in Gagim, one
maid Shala-beltum, price ten shekels of silver, all this for the future in
its entirety, what Eli-eriṣa, votary of Shamash, daughter of Shamash-ilu,
has or shall acquire, she gives to Belisunu, votary of Shamash,
daughter of Nakarum. Every year Belisunu shall give to Eli-eriṣa
three <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn, ten minas of bronze,
and twelve <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of oil.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Precautions against suits</note>
The <foreign rend='italic'>aplûtu</foreign>
thus given was in many cases an alienation of
property on which some relative had claims. Even where
their consent was not necessary it was desirable that they
should not involve the heir in legal processes. Hence, such
relatives are called up to covenant that they will raise no
objection to the heir's peaceable
succession.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 368.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Duties of adopted child to parents' support</note>
The obligation to support the adoptive parent is emphasized.
The amount of sustenance varies much. Another
list of yearly allowances reads one shekel of silver, woollen
yarn, six <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of oil, four
<foreign rend='italic'>išinni Shamašh</foreign>,
ten <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of fat, one
side, two <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn. Many others could be instanced,
but they make no great addition to our knowledge.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Service</note>
The obligation might be service; as when a lady adopts
a maid to serve her for life and inherit a certain
house.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 375.</note> In
another case a lady adopts a son to bring up her daughter
and give her to a husband. <q>If he vexes his adoptive
mother, she will cut him off. He shall not have claim on
any of the goods of his adoptive mother, but shall inherit
her field and garden.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
2484.</note> Evidently the mother intended her
personal effects to be her daughter's and to form her marriage-portion.
The obligation did not always last long.
Thus we find that Lautum, who was adopted by a votary
and was herself a votary, two years later was in a position
to adopt as her daughter another votary.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 609.</note> She handed on
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
the same property, indicating that her adoptive mother was
dead.
</p>

<p>
The adoption of a child by a lady of fortune was evidently
a good settlement for the child, and usually the real
parents raised no objection. We even find the father of a
girl adopted by a lady, making an addition to her heritage
in the form of a gift to the adopting mother on her effecting
the deed of adoption. He gave them two male and two
female slaves. Here also the girl covenanted to support
the adoptive mother.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
2489.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Punishment for neglect of these duties</note>
Occasionally the adopted child did not carry out his
duties. This was good ground for disinheriting him.
But disinheritance was not to be inflicted without the sanction
of the judges.<note place='foot'>§ 168.</note> Hence we find that when a lady had
adopted a daughter who failed to give her food and drink,
the judges summoned them to the great temple of Shamash
in Sippara, there cut off the daughter from her heritage, took
away the tablet of adoption granted her, and destroyed
it.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 360.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Care of aged parents</note>
A curious case is where A, the daughter of B and C, endows
D to take care of B and C. As long as D lives A
covenants to allow her so much. When she dies A will
herself perform the duties.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2460.</note> Here A evidently expected
her parents would not live long, but also D must have been
aged, or infirm, as A contemplates the chance of her parents
outliving D. This is not a case of adoption, but is so similar
in purpose to those above as to deserve a place here.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inheritance rights</note>
Occasionally, however, the adopting parent reserved the
usufruct of the property for life only, fixing by deed the
rightful heir.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2179.</note> This was, in effect, a will or testament, since
the inheritance did not take effect until after the death of
the testator.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XVI. Rights Of Inheritance</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The division of an inheritance</note>
The division of property among the children invariably
followed the death of the father. We have a very large
number of contracts bearing on this custom. The contract
sets forth the particulars of the division and includes a
sworn declaration on the part of the recipients to make no
further claim. There were certain reservations to be made
in the case of minors, for whom a portion had to be set
aside to provide for their making the proper gifts to the
parents of their brides on marriage.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Usage as illustrated by the contracts</note>
The Code deals at length with the laws of inheritance,
which are best treated under the head of marriage. The
actual examples occurring in the documents of the period
serve to illustrate the practical working of these laws, but
hardly add to our knowledge. They are usually occupied
with the division of property among brothers. Sometimes
we have some light on the reservations made in favor of
other members of the family. Thus two brothers divide
the property of their <q>father's house</q> and of their sister,
a votary. The sister did not take her property, but the
brothers were trustees for her enjoyment of it during her
life, when it reverted to them in full.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 105.</note> The document
merely states the amount of one brother's share and the
other's agreement to be content with the division. In another
case, where four brothers share the property of their
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
<q>father's house,</q> no details of their shares are given, but only
their agreement to abide by the division made.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 106.</note> In another
case the eldest brother allots to each of two younger
brothers a share and takes a woman slave and her children
as his portion. He is said to do this of his <q>own power,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>ina emur ḳamanišu</foreign>, and to have given them this of his
<q>own graciousness,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>ina tûbâtišu</foreign>. The brothers
swear to make no further claim on the <q>grant,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>maršîtu</foreign>, of their father.
Either the property to which they were legally entitled had
already been allotted them, or possibly they had no legal
claim on any. The eldest brother is a high official, a
<foreign rend='italic'>pa-pa</foreign>, and perhaps had succeeded his father in office.
The father's property would then be the endowment of his
office, a grant from the king, and as such inalienable from
the office to which the eldest son had succeeded. The three
slaves may have thus been all the private property of the
father which was available for division. But the context
seems to suggest that what the brothers received was a concession
from the eldest brother on which they had no claim.
He may in consideration of his succeeding to his father's
appointment have made this concession to his brothers as a
consolation.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 107.</note>
In another case a mother gives certain sums
to her three sons. She had still left two sons and two
daughters, and the first three agree to make no claim on
all that she and these four children have or shall acquire.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 109.</note> It is noteworthy that one of the three receives ten shekels
as the <foreign rend='italic'>terḫatu</foreign> of the wife he shall marry. He was
evidently not of marriageable age, or, at any rate, still unmarried.
In such a case the Code directed that on partition of
the father's property, a special sum should be laid aside for
this necessary present to the bride's father.<note place='foot'>§ 116.</note> So we find
two brothers giving a sister a share consisting of one-third
<hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of a house, next her brother's, one maid, a bed and a
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
chair, with the promise that on the day that she marries and
enters her husband's house she shall receive further two-thirds
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of land and
slaves.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 33.</note>
The list of property is
often given, especially where brothers give shares to their
sisters. Sometimes the relationship is less close. Thus a
man shares with two sons of his father's brother, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, with
two cousins, ten <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of unreclaimed land, taking three and
a half <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> as his
share.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 12.</note>
Sometimes the property included
the mother's marriage-portion. Thus three brothers divide
their property and two of them, as her sons, share their
mother's marriage-portion:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
14.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Division of property between three brothers</note>
<quote rend='display'>
One <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of built land and granary, next the house of Ubarrîa and
next that of Bushum-Sin, two exits to the street, the property of
Urra-nâṣir, which he divided with Sin-ikisham and Ibni-Shamash.
From mouth (?) to gold the share is complete. Brother shall not
dispute with brother. By Shamash, Malkat, Marduk, and Sin-mubaliṭ
they swore. Nine witnesses. Thirteenth year of
Sin-mubaliṭ.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 60.</note>
</quote>

<p>
The property which fell to Urra-nâṣir was a house occupying
one <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of land. The text means not that the three
men, Urra-nâṣir, Sin-ikisham, and Ibni-Shamash, divided the
house among them, but that at the division this house was
the share of the first named. What the two, Sin-ikisham
and Ibni-Shamash, had as their share we are not here told.
But the three agreed not to call in question the division of
property, which probably came to them from their father or
mother. Fortunately we know in this case what the others
got. Thus we find:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of built land, (and) granary, next the house of
Ibni-Shamash and next the street, its exit to the street, the property of Sin-ikisham,
which he divided with Ibni-Shamash and Urra-nâṣir. From
mouth (?) to gold the share is complete. Brother shall not dispute
with brother. By Shamash, Malkat, and Sin-mubaliṭ they swore.
Nine witnesses. Thirteenth year of
Sin-mubaliṭ.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
31 = M. A. P., 103.</note>
</quote>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
And again:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of built land, (and) granary,
next the house of Sin-ikisham
and next the house of Ishtar-Ummasha, two exits to the street, the
property of Ibni-Shamash, which he divided with Sin-ikisham and
Urra-nâṣir. From mouth (?) to gold the share [is complete]. Brother
shall not dispute with brother. By Shamash, Malkat, Marduk, and
Sin-mubaliṭ they swore. Nine witnesses. Thirteenth year of
Sin-mubaliṭ.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
46 = M. A. P., 104.</note>
</quote>

<p>
Thus we see that each brother, if they were brothers,
obtained exactly the same share, one <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of land on which
a house was built. Two of them, Sin-ikisham and Ibni-Shamash,
were next door to each other. Ibni-Shamash had
the street on the other side of him, in fact, occupied a
corner house. The third brother, Urra-nâṣir, had a house
in another part of the town. We therefore must understand
the word <q>divided</q> in the sense <q>obtained on division.</q>
In the second and third case the word rendered
share is literally <q>all.</q> But the first text shows that <q>all
is complete</q> means <q>the share is complete.</q> The meaning
of the expression, <q>from mouth (?) to gold,</q> is still obscure.
It is not certain that <foreign rend='italic'>bi-e</foreign> really means <q>mouth.</q>
But as Meissner has shown,<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p.
145.</note> it exchanges with the ideogram
for <q>mouth.</q> He therefore suggests that the whole phrase
means <q>from the first verbal discussion of the division to its
consummation by payment the partition of the property is
now at an end.</q> That seems probable enough, but we may
yet find a different explanation. If this be correct, it is of
interest to note that while silver seems to have been the
usual money, this phrase seems to assume that gold would
be used in payment. A curious parallel is the fact that
while in later times we always find the order gold and
silver, in Sumerian texts it is silver and gold. We must
not press this too far, but it really looks as if in early
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
times silver was more valued, or at any rate, less in use
than gold.
</p>

<p>
It will be noted that the second text omits Marduk from
the oath, while the others name him. The third text omits
<foreign rend='italic'>gamru</foreign>, <q>is complete.</q>
The nine witnesses and the date
are the same for all three. In the first and last the names
of the witnesses only are given, but in the second the name
of the father is added to several of them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The great difficulty of interpreting details in testamentary
documents</note>
In the case of testamentary documents, using the phrase
in a loose way to cover gifts embodied in a deed, we usually
find a list of property donated. These lists give rise to
insuperable difficulties to the translator. The difficulties
are not so much due to the imperfections of our knowledge
of Babylonian methods of writing as to the practical impossibility
of finding exact terms in one language for the
terms relating to domestic furniture in another. Even in
the case of languages so well known to us as French and
German are, we are obliged to transfer their words unaltered
into our own tongue. The most skilled translator must
leave a French or German <emph>menu</emph> untranslated. We know
for instance that the signs, <hi rend='italic'>GIŠ-GU-ZA</hi> were used to denote
the Babylonian <foreign rend='italic'>kussû</foreign>. When a god or king sat upon a
<foreign rend='italic'>kussû</foreign> we may be satisfied with the rendering
<q>throne,</q> but when we find a lady leaving her daughter six
<foreign rend='italic'>kussê</foreign>
we feel that <q>throne</q> is rather too grand. But whether
we elect to call them chairs, stools, or seats, we are guilty
of some false suggestion. A careful examination of the
sculptured and pictured monuments may give us a clearer
idea of what seats were used. The reader may consult
Perrot and Chipiez, or the dictionaries of the Bible, under
the articles: chairs, couches, <hi rend='italic'>et cetera</hi>, for illustrations.
Unless we can find a picture with a named article upon it
we are still left a wide margin of conjecture. The picture
of Sennacherib receiving the tribute and submission of
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
Lachish gives the contemporary representation of a <foreign rend='italic'>kussû
nimedu</foreign>, but we cannot argue that every
<foreign rend='italic'>kussû</foreign> was of the
same pattern.
</p>

<p>
We may decline to attempt a solution and merely give
the original word, we may make a purely arbitrary rendering,
or we may accompany the original word with an approximate
indication of what is known of its nature. In neither
case do we translate, for that is clearly impossible. But
the reader needs a word of caution against the translations
which show no signs of hesitancy. They are not indicative
of greater knowledge, but of less candor. Further, to
scholars a reminder is needed that even the syllabaries and
bilingual texts do not give exact information. Thus alongside
<hi rend='italic'>GIŠ-GU-ZA</hi> we find a number of other ideograms, all
of which are in certain connections rendered <foreign rend='italic'>kussû</foreign>,
adequately enough no doubt, but that they all denoted exactly
the same article of furniture is far from likely. A closer
approximation to an exact rendering may come with the
knowledge of a large number of different contexts, each of
which may shade off something of the rough meaning. One
of the great difficulties of the translator is that the same
word often occurs again and again, but always in exactly
the same context. This is especially the case in the legal
documents, filled as they are with stock phrases.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Disinheritance in the Sumerian laws</note>
According to the Sumerian laws disinheritance appears
to have been simply the result of repudiation of a child by
a parent, who has said to him, <q>You are not my son.</q> The
penalty for a child's repudiation of parents is to be reduced
to the condition of a slave. There may also be a reference
to renunciation on the part of an adopted child, but there
are no legal documents to clear up the point.<note place='foot'>See page
<ref target="Pg039">39</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the Code of Ḥammurabi</note>
The Code is much clearer. Here the father is minded
to cut off his son. But the disinheritance must be done in
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
legal form. The father must say to a judge, <q>I renounce
my son.</q> The judge must then inquire into the grounds of
this determination. A grave fault must be alleged. What
this was we are not told. But rebellious conduct, idleness,
and failure to provide for parents are probable. A parent
had the right to his son's work. An adoptive parent had a
right by the deed of adoption to maintenance. If the fault
could be established as a first offence, the judge was bound
to try and reconcile the father. If it was repeated, disinheritance
took place legally. It was done by a deed duly
drawn up. The Sumerian laws show that a mother had
the same power as the father. Whether this was only
exercised when there was no father, or whether a wife
could act in this way independently of her husband in disinheriting
children, does not appear. But possibly she
had power in this respect only over her own property.<note place='foot'>§§
168, 169.</note>
</p>

<p>
It has been suggested that disinheritance sometimes took
place as a legal form and with consent of a child, in order
to admit of his adoption into another family or to free the
parents from responsibility for the business engagements of
the son.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the case of adopted children</note>
An adoptive parent, who had brought up a child and
afterwards had children of his own, could not entirely disinherit
his adopted child. He was bound to allow him one-third
of a child's share. But he could not alienate to him
real estate.<note place='foot'>§ 191.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XVII. Slavery</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The slave a chattel</note>
In modern thought slavery concerns personal rights.
But it was not thus regarded by the Babylonians, for the
slave was an inferior domestic, and, like the son in his
father's house, <foreign rend='italic'>minor capitis</foreign>.
That he was actually a chattel
is clear from his being sold, pledged, or deposited. He
was property and as such a money equivalent. He might
be made use of to discharge a debt, according to his value.
Hence, while some account of slavery belongs with the discussion
of the family, it is also a part of the section dealing
with property, since the slave was a piece of property.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of a slave</note>
But the slave had a great amount of freedom, and was
in no respect worse off than a child or even a wife. He
could acquire property, marry a free woman, engage in
trade, and act as principal in contract with a free man.
Only, his property, at his death, fell to his master. He was
bound to do service without pay, though he had the right
to food and drink. He could not leave his master's service
at his own will, but he might acquire enough property to
buy his freedom. He was tied to one spot, not being
allowed to leave the city, but might be sent anywhere at
command.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Complexity of the evidence regarding slavery</note>
His status was, however, a complex of seeming inconsistencies.
Yet it was so well understood that we rarely
get any hints as to the exact details. It is only by collecting
a vast mass of statements as to what actually occurred
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
that we can deduce some idea of the actual facts. Professor
Oppert in his tract, <hi rend='italic'>La Condition des Esclaves à Babylone,
Comptes Rendues</hi>, 1888, pp. 11 ff.; and Dr. B. Meissner, in
his dissertation, <hi rend='italic'>De Servitute Babylonico-Assyriaca</hi>, have
gathered together the chief facts to be gleaned from the
scattered hints in the contracts. Professor Kohler and
Dr. Peiser discussed the question thoroughly in their <hi rend='italic'>Aus
Babylonische Rechtsleben</hi>. Many articles discussing the
contracts, and most of the histories touch upon the subject.
We shall come back to it later under the head of Sales of
Slaves. It is very difficult to disentangle facts from the
mass of scattered hints, often consisting of no more than a
word or two in a long document.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its very early existence</note>
The institution of slavery dates back to the earliest
times. We cannot in any way attempt to date its rise.
</p>

<p>
Already in the stele of Manistusu we find a slave-girl used
as part of the price of land and worth thirteen shekels;<note place='foot'>D.
E. P., ii., p. 25.</note> while nine other slaves, male and female, are reckoned for
one-third of a mina apiece. This remained a fair average
price for a slave in Babylonia down to the time of the
Persian conquest. For the variations, see later under Sales
of Slaves.<note place='foot'>Chapter <ref target="Chapter_XXII">XXII</ref>.</note>
The Code shows that the slave was not free
to contract except by power of attorney,<note place='foot'>§ 6.</note> and that it was
penal to seduce him from his master's service,<note place='foot'>§ 15.</note> or to
harbor him when fugitive.<note place='foot'>§ 16.</note> It fixes a reward for his
recapture,<note place='foot'>§ 17.</note> makes it penal to retain a recaptured
slave,<note place='foot'>§ 19.</note> and deals with his
re-escape.<note place='foot'>§ 20.</note> It shows that he was subject to the
<q>levy.</q><note place='foot'>§ 16.</note>
It also determines the position of a slave-woman who bears
children to her master,<note place='foot'>§ 119.</note>
or of a slave who marries a free woman.<note place='foot'>§ 175.</note>
In each case the children are free. It fixes the
fees to be paid by the slave's master for his cure,<note place='foot'>§§ 218, 223.</note>
deals
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
with injuries done to a slave,<note place='foot'>§ 99.</note> damages being paid to his
master;<note place='foot'>Cf. § 251.</note> enacts that if captured and sold abroad he
must be freed, if re-patriated,<note place='foot'>§ 280.</note> and a native of
Babylonia, otherwise he returned to his master.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sale of slaves</note>
By far the greatest number of references to the slave
condition occur in documents relating to the sale of slaves.
These may be summarized here. One peculiarity always
marked the sale of a slave, it was not so irrevocable as that
of a house or field. For a slave might not be all he seemed.
He might be diseased, or subject to fits, he might have vices
of disposition, especially a tendency to run away. A female
slave might be defective in what constituted her chief
attraction. Hence there was usually a stipulation that if
the buyer had a legitimate cause of complaint he could
return his purchase and have his money back. In fact, an
undisclosed defect would invalidate the sale. These defects
might be physical, inherent, contingent, or legal.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Diseases regarded as just cause for a repudiation
of the contract to buy a slave</note>
There seems to have been a dreaded disease called the
<foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign>. Professor Jensen<note place='foot'>K.
B., vi., p. 389.</note> has shown how largely it bulks
in the literature, and what dire effects are ascribed to it.
But it was not the only severe disease from which men
suffered then. It is associated with several others as bad.
Hence in legal documents we may take it as a typical example
of a serious disease, which would so detract from the
value of a slave that the purchaser would not keep him. It
is evident that it was something that the purchaser could
not detect at sight. Perhaps it was a disease which took
some time to show itself. It is mentioned in the Code and
in the sales of slaves of the First Dynasty of Babylon. It
also occurs in Assyrian deeds of sale, down to the end of
the seventh century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> The Code and the contemporary
contracts allow one month within which a plea could be
raised that the slave had the <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign>. The purchaser could
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
then return him and have his money back. In the Assyrian
deeds one hundred days is allowed.
</p>

<p>
In the Assyrian deeds <foreign rend='italic'>ṣibtu</foreign> is also allowed a hundred
days. This is often associated with <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign> in the
mythological texts as equally dreaded. It affected the hands or the
mouth. We may render it <q>seizure,</q> and think of some
form of <q>paralysis.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legal defects</note>
The objections which come under the head of legal defects
are summed up in the Code as a <foreign rend='italic'>bagru</foreign>, or
<q>complaint.</q> In the contracts and Code this could be pleaded
at any time. So in Assyrian times a <foreign rend='italic'>sartu</foreign>,
<q>a vice,</q> could be the ground for repudiation at any time. This might
arise from the disposition of the slave. The sale might
also be invalidated by a claim on him for service to the
state; by a lien held by a creditor; by a claim to free
citizenship. But we are not yet in a position to state definitely
what was the exact nature of these claims. Doubtless
the recovery of further codes will fix them finally.
</p>

<p>
In later Babylonian times Law B specially provides for
the return of the slave at any time, if a claim be made
on him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assyrian usages regarding slaves</note>
In Assyrian times sales of slaves are very frequent, and we
learn much more about the status of the slave. The slave
was certainly a social inferior, but probably had more freedom
than any other who ever bore the name. He certainly
had his own property and could contract like a free man.
A young slave lived in his master's house up to a certain
age, when his master found a wife for him. This was usually
a slave-girl. The female slaves remained in the house
as domestic servants to old age, unless they were married to
a slave. Married slaves lived in their own houses for the
most part. Many such men seem to have taken up out-door
work, gardening, agricultural labor, or the like, on their
master's estates. Others engaged in business on their own
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
account. But from all the master had a certain income.
This was, within a little, the average interest on the money-value
of a slave. And that interest was usually twenty-five
per cent. per annum in Assyria.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Right of a slave to the enjoyment of his property
and family</note>
Theoretically a master owned his slave's property. What
this ownership amounted to is hard to say. But the slave
was rarely separated from it. His family at any rate was
sacred. When sold, he was sold with his family. This, of
course, does not exclude the sale of a young man at a time
when he would naturally leave his father's home. Young
women were taken into domestic service, and after a time
sold. But there was none of that tearing of children from
parents, which so shocked people in the modern examples.
It is probable that a slave could not marry without his master's
consent. He certainly could not live where he liked.
But he was free to acquire fair wealth, and his property was
so far his own that he could buy his own freedom with it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The serfs</note>
In Assyria there was a large body of serfs, <foreign rend='italic'>glebae
adscripti</foreign>. They could be sold with the land. But they were free to
work as they chose. Usually they cultivated a plot of their
master's, but often had lands and stock of their own. They
were not free to move, and probably paid a rent, one or two
thirds of their produce. But they were mostly on the metayer
system, and could claim seed, implements, stock, and
other necessary supplies from their master. This class evidently
possessed privileges highly esteemed, for their ranks
were recruited from all classes of artisans in the towns,
cooks, brewers, gardeners, washermen, and even scribes.
Some of these were probably free men, others certainly
had been slaves.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Advantages of slavery</note>
The three classes, domestic slaves, married slaves, and
serfs, were continually exchanging their condition. Not a
few free men, whether from debt, judicial sentence, or choice,
were added to these classes. For these men, if dependent,
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
were cared for and provided with the necessaries of life.
They were, if domestic, clothed, housed, and fed; if they
married and lived out, they were given a house, and either
were provided with land that brought them a living, or
engaged in business.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Liability for forced labor</note>
The army and corvée, or levy for forced labor, were chiefly
obtained from the slaves, and above all from the serfs. A
head of a family, or mother, was not liable. But young
men and women had to serve a certain number of terms of
service, seemingly six.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Assyrian Doomsday Book</hi>, p. 24.</note>
Hence it was of importance to the
buyer of a slave to receive a guarantee that this claim had
been satisfied.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Opportunity to acquire skill as artisans</note>
We have many examples of slaves who were skilled artisans.
They had been taught a handicraft. Later we shall
come across cases of apprenticeship of slaves to learn a craft.
But all the artisans were not slaves. Indeed, some of the
craftsmen, as goldsmiths, silversmiths, carpenters, were
wealthy persons.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The slave an independent asset</note>
As a rule, though the slave is named, his father is not.
But, just as in mediæval times, a serf's father is named.
The serf's holding seems to have been hereditary. But we
have too few examples to be sure of our ground here. The
slave's father was not concerned in the sale, and that may
be the sole reason why he is not named. Fathers sometimes
sold their children to be slaves, then they are named. Such
sales are not so unnatural as they appear. It was a sure provision
for life for a child to sell him as slave to a family in
good position.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The later disappearance of the serf</note>
In the later Babylonian times, the almost total disappearance
of the serf has been noted as very remarkable. But
this may be entirely due to the nature of our documents.
The temples owned a great deal of land and their slaves
were in the condition of serfs.
</p>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Slave sales</note>
In later Babylonian times we have a very large number
of examples of slave sales. So far as the formula of a
deed of sale is concerned, there is nothing to distinguish
from a sale of the ordinary type, thus marking the slave
as a chattel.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Guarantees exacted in such deeds:</note>
But there are several clauses, which directly illustrate
the possession of slaves, their position and liabilities. One
clause, frequent when slaves were either pledged or sold,
was a guarantee on the part of the owner against a number
of contingencies. These are not easy to understand.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against rebellions (?)</note>
First we have the <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu siḫû</foreign>.
<foreign rend='italic'>Siḫu</foreign> means rebellion or
civil war. Sennacherib was slain in such an uprising.<note place='foot'>K.
B., ii., p. 282.</note> It
may be that then the slave would be impressed for defence of
law and order. Or it may be that <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu siḫû</foreign> is the rebel,
or mob, who might carry off the slave. Or the contingency
contemplated may be that the slave should turn rebel and
refuse to do his master's bidding. The fact that a ship was
also guaranteed against <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu
siḫû</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Cyr. 310, Nbk. 201.</note>
renders this less likely.
A ship could not turn rebel. It is not unlikely that slaves
often joined in the rebellions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against flight</note>
That a slave would escape by flight was always a danger.
The slave had great freedom and many opportunities of getting
away. The only security was that wherever he went
he was likely to be recognized as a slave and anyone might
recapture him. However, the captor had a right to a reward
and so the owner would have to pay to get him back,
besides losing his services for a time. Hence a slave who
had a fancy for running away was likely to be troublesome
and costly. That might lead to his being sold. But the
purchaser protected himself by a guarantee on the seller's
part that the slave would not run away. Then if the slave
fled and was brought back, the captor gave a receipt for the
sum paid him, and the owner reclaimed it from the seller.
</p>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against untimely death</note>
The captor might retain the slave until he was paid.<note place='foot'>Z.
A., iii., p. 86.</note> In
other cases the seller had to recover the slave for the
buyer. In Assyrian times the seller guaranteed also
against death. Here it has been argued that the guarantee
meant only that the slave had not fled or was not dead at
the time of sale. This is not likely in the case of death.
Surely no man could buy a slave who was dead. He
would not pay, if the slave was not delivered. But he
might bargain for recompense, if the slave died within a
short time after purchase, as the seller might have had
reason to know that he was ill.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against unexpected claims</note>
A guarantee was also given against the <foreign rend='italic'>pakirânu</foreign>. This
is literally <q>the claimant.</q> What claim he had is not
stated. When the slave was pledged, this might be a creditor
to whom he had previously been pledged. But it
covers all claims on the slave.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 146.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against over-exaction in the public service</note>
Another indemnity is the <foreign rend='italic'>arad šarrûtu</foreign>, or in the case of
female slaves, the <foreign rend='italic'>amat šarrûtu</foreign>. This was the status of
an <foreign rend='italic'>arad šarri</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>amat
šarri</foreign>, king's man or maid. The king,
or state, had a right to the services of certain slaves. How
long this was for, how it was discharged, and how a private
person could give a guarantee against it, we do not exactly
know. It may have been limited to slaves taken in war; it
probably consisted in forced service; it may have been for
a limited period, so that the guarantee amounted to an assurance
that it was over. But it is possible that it would
be compounded for, or a substitute provided. At any rate
the seller held the buyer indemnified against this claim.<note place='foot'>Cyr.
146; Camb. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against redemption as men of family</note>
There was also a guarantee against <foreign rend='italic'>mârbanûtu</foreign>, the status
of a <foreign rend='italic'>mâr banû</foreign>, or <q>son of an ancestor.</q> The
difficulty which this raised was that, if a man was a scion of a noble
family, he might be redeemed by it. The same result
would follow from his being adopted. Hence some consider
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>mâr banû</foreign> to mean <q>adopted son.</q> But it does not
always mean that. We have no good example of a slave
being redeemed on this ground. But we know that they
sometimes laid claim to be free men. This would of course
involve a loss and at any rate a trouble to the owner.
But we have not yet very full information on the point.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against illegal enslavement</note>
Finally there is mentioned a claim called <foreign rend='italic'>šušanûtu</foreign>.
This occurs in Persian times only<note place='foot'>Dar. 212.</note> and may be
the status of a <foreign rend='italic'>šušanu</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
a Susian, or one of the conquering race. Such
it may have been illegal to buy or hold in slavery. But in
Assyrian times an official in the service of the royal house
is called <foreign rend='italic'>šušanu</foreign>. We do not yet know what his duties
were, but it may be that this official was one who could be
called up for service at any time and therefore was undesirable
as a slave.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The branding or tattooing of slaves</note>
The <foreign rend='italic'>abuttu</foreign> which the
Code<note place='foot'>§ 103.</note> contemplates a mistress putting
on an insolent maid and so reducing her to slavery, or
which the phrase-books contemplate a master laying upon
a slave, or which an adoptive parent may set on a rebellious
adopted son before selling him into
servitude,<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 95.</note> has usually
been taken to be a fetter. But in the case of a man, who
being sold as a slave, had escaped and was claimed by the
levy-master, we find the latter saying, <foreign rend='italic'>ellita
abuttaka gullubat</foreign>, <q>thy <foreign rend='italic'>abuttu</foreign>
is clearly branded,</q> or tattooed. Hence it may only be a mark.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The other ways of indicating servitude</note>
There is frequent mention in early times of a mark upon
slaves. The Code<note place='foot'>§ 226.</note> talks of marking a slave, but in a way
that is difficult to understand. The verb usually rendered
<q>brand</q> has been shown by Professor P.
Jensen<note place='foot'>K. B., vi., p. 377.</note> to include
incised marks. Hence the penalty which was once rendered
<q>shear his front hair</q> is thought to mean <q>brand his forehead.</q>
The Code fixes a severe penalty for the putting of
an indelible mark on a slave without his owner's consent.
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
This could hardly be enforced for merely giving the slave a
bald forehead, like the Hebrew <foreign rend='italic'>peôt</foreign>,
or like a <q>tonsure.</q> The mark borne on the forehead by Cain, or by the <q>sealed</q>
in the Apocalypse, is far more to the point as a parallel.
The slaves also wore little clay tablets with the name of
their owner inscribed upon them. There are a number of
these preserved in the Louvre. On one now in the British
Museum we have this inscription: <q>Of the woman Ḥipâ,
who is in the hands of Sin-êresh. Sebat, eleventh year of
Merodach-baladan, King of Babylon.</q><note place='foot'>K.
3787 K. B., iv., p. 166 f.</note> How these were
attached to the slave is not very clear. But they must have
been anything but an indelible mark. In the later Babylonian
times we have<note place='foot'>Camb. 291.</note>
a slave marked by a sign on his ears
and a white mark in his eye. Both may denote natural
marks.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De serv.</hi>, p.
20.</note> A more definite example is a slave <q>whose right
hand has written upon it the name of Ina-Esagil-lilbur</q>;<note place='foot'>P.
S. B. A. 83, p. 104.</note>
and another <q>on whose left hand was written the name
of Meskitu.</q><note place='foot'>P. S. B. A. 84, p.
102.</note> These were the names of the owners, not of
the slaves themselves. This renders it probable that the
branding and the like was always an incised mark, a species
of tattoo, which of course was indelible. That the same person
who tattooed men should brand animals, or even shear
them, is not an insuperable objection. But there is no
reason to suppose that the brander ever was a sheep-shearer.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Significance of slave-names</note>
In respect to the names of slaves we may regard them
with some interest as helping to determine the sources from
which slaves were recruited. Some bear good Babylonian
names, and perhaps when the father's name is also Babylonian
we may conclude that they had been born free, but were
either sold into slavery by the head of the family, or, having
once been adopted, had been repudiated and reduced to
slavery again, or had been sold for debt. We have examples
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
of all such cases. A father and mother sold their son;<note place='foot'>Nbk. 70.</note>
a mother who had adopted two girls repudiated them
again;<note place='foot'>Nbk. 625.</note> a brother gave
a younger brother as a pledge.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 311.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Foreign-born slaves</note>
When the slave's name is not Babylonian or Assyrian, a
foreign nationality is nearly certain. These names are very
valuable when they can be assigned to their nationalities,
as confirming the historical claims of the kings to conquest.
Sometimes they are actual gentile names, as Miṣirai,
<q>Egyptian,</q> Tubalai, <q>man from Tubal.</q> But many may
have been directly purchased abroad and sold to Babylonians.
A great many foreign slaves doubtless received
native names. Thus an Egyptian woman was called Nanâ-ittîa.<note place='foot'>Camb.
334.</note> Some of the names of slaves are true Babylonian,
but of a rare and odd form, which has caused some to
imagine them to be foreign. But this is not necessary.
Servants are often renamed after the families to which they
belong, and finally become known by names which were
never theirs. Masters seem sometimes to have given their
own names to slaves. Their names are often contracted,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 697.</note>
and some even appear to have had two.<note place='foot'>Z. A., iii., 135.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various methods of making slaves</note>
The slaves were not only captives taken in war, but were
bought abroad, and not a few were reduced to that condition
from being freeborn citizens. Slavery awaited the rebellious
child or the contentious wife. But it was not allowed
by the Code for a man to sell his maid outright, who
had borne him children. And if he sold his wife or child to
pay a debt, the buyer could not keep them beyond a certain
time. But in all periods parents sold their children, and
there does not seem to be any clause demanding any future
release.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A slave's right to hold and use property</note>
The slave had private property which was secured to
him. He paid a sort of rent for it. This was an annual
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
fixed sum called his <foreign rend='italic'>mandattu</foreign>, the same word as for the
tribute of a prince to his overlord. In the case of a female
slave this was twelve shekels <foreign rend='italic'>per annum</foreign>. Further, he paid
a percentage on his profits.<note place='foot'>A. B. R.,
i., pp. 1 ff.</note> The slave might hold another
slave as pledge, lend money, and enter into business relations
with another slave even of the same house. He might borrow
money of another slave. Hence he was very free to do
business. But when he entered into business relations with
another master's slave, or a free man, he sometimes met
with a difficulty. He seemingly could not enforce his own
rights against a free man. At any rate, we find that in such
cases his master assumed the liability and pleaded for him.
In fact, the master had to acknowledge his undertakings,
though he did not guarantee them. Subject to this protection
from his master, the slave was free to engage in commerce.
He lent to free men, entered into partnership, and
owned a scribe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A slave's evidence not good against a free man</note>
Here is an example illustrating one of the above
points.<note place='foot'>Nbn., 738.</note>
S had taken a loan of L. His master, A, became aware of
it and guaranteed its repayment. He then put S into L's
hands as his pledge to pay it off. Now, A died, and his
son, B, sells S to C, as part of his own property. But L
still holds possession of S. C demands S from L. L says
<q>Not until my money is paid off. If C will do this he
may have S. But until he can prove that it has been done
he cannot have S.</q> The proof probably lay in B's hands, if
he had preserved it from his father A's records. Delay is
granted for C to produce the proof that S has worked off
the debt. It is clear that the evidence of S was not admitted
on this point.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A slave's value proportioned to his producing power</note>
That in the case of some slaves their value to their master
consisted in their <foreign rend='italic'>mandattu</foreign> is clear from the fact when a
master sold a slave and did not at once hand him over, the
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
seller had to pay a proportional amount of this fee to the
buyer.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 573.</note>
Of course, in transferring a slave to another owner,
the seller could not separate him from his property. That
was his own. A slave who had acquired a fair amount of
wealth, or was earning well in trade, would produce a higher
income to his master and sell for more. What was sold
then, was an interest, the master's, in his slave's work.
Hence prices varied very much. We are not always able
to see what was the reason of the high price, but it was
evident then to those who made the bargain. An average
price in the later Babylonian era seems to have been twenty
shekels, the interest on which at the usual twenty per cent.
would be four shekels. This, then, was the annual value of
a slave above his keep. If the keep amounted to about
eight shekels <foreign rend='italic'>per annum</foreign>, that gives the value of a
slave's work as twelve shekels yearly. This is what an unskilled
slave was worth to his master. If, then, a man married
a slave-girl, he ought to pay her master about twelve
shekels a year for his loss of her services. Of course, the
master retained his right over her, but it seems to have been
a tacit understanding that he could not sell her away from
her husband. So really what he sold was, after all, only a
right to income from her husband of twelve shekels a year.
The children were also his born slaves, if the father was his
slave. We do not know how matters would be arranged
if the man was slave to one master, the wife to another.
Probably this was provided against by the master giving his
slave a wife from his own maids, or buying a slave-girl as
wife for him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The history of the slave Bariki-ilu</note>
It occasionally happens that we can trace the history
of a particular slave for some time. Thus, Bariki-ilu was
pledged for twenty-eight shekels to Aḫinûri, in the thirty-fifth
year of Nebuchadrezzar.<note place='foot'>Z. A., iii.,
p. 87.</note> In the next year we find
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
him in the possession of Piru, his wife Gagâ, and a cousin
Zirîa. What they gave for him does not appear. But they
now sold him for twenty-three shekels to Nabû-zêr-ukîn.
He must have fled from his new master, for four years later,
the same three people pledged him.<note place='foot'>Nbk.
408.</note> But he seems to have
been unsatisfactory as a pledge. For next, we find that
Gagâ's daughter (Piru having probably died), being about
to be married to Iddin-aplu, this slave was set down as
part of her marriage-portion. She gave him over to her
husband and his son. In their possession he remained
awhile, but on the death of his mistress, was handed over to
the great banker, Itti-Marduk-balâṭu. These events, extending
from the thirty-fifth year of Nebuchadrezzar to the
seventh year of Nabonidus, were all put in evidence when
Bariki-ilu tried later to prove that he was a free man. He
pretended to be the adopted son of Bêl-rimâni. He had to
confess that he had twice run away from his master and had
been many days in hiding. Then he was afraid and pretended
to have been an adopted son. This, if proved, would
have freed him. But he confessed that it was a pretence,
and had to return to his servitude. The case was decided
in the tenth year of Nabonidus.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A runaway slave not always returnable</note>
It seems clear that when a slave ran away to his old owners,
they did not always deliver him up again to the man
who bought him of them. They probably had to return the
purchase-money. The buyer probably would not accept
him again.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Apprenticing slaves to a trade</note>
One feature which the later Babylonian contracts show
us for the first time, but which probably was always in
force, is the apprenticing of slaves to a trade. Instances of
this are fairly numerous. The person to whom the slave
was apprenticed was usually a slave himself. The teacher
was bound to teach the trade thoroughly. The owner of the
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
slave gave him up to the teacher for a fixed term of years,
differing for different trades. He had to furnish a daily
allowance of food and a regular supply of clothing. At the
end of the term, the slave might remain with his teacher on
payment of a fixed <foreign rend='italic'>mandattu</foreign>
or income to the owner. Penalties
were fixed for neglecting to teach him properly.
The trades named are weaving, five years' term;<note place='foot'>Cyr. 64.</note> baking,
a year and a quarter;<note place='foot'>Cyr. 248.</note> stone-cutting, four
years;<note place='foot'>Cyr. 325.</note> fulling, six
years;<note place='foot'>Cyr. 313.</note> besides others not yet recognized.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fee paid by service</note>
The teacher had no fee, but only the apprentice's work
for his trouble. The owner was therefore bound to allow
the apprentice to remain a fair time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Relative proportion of slaves to free men</note>
A question of considerable interest which needs to be
worked out is the relative number of slaves in the population.
In early times the impression one gets is that they
were few. Even in the time of the First Dynasty of Babylon,
the evidence at the disposal of Dr. Meissner in 1892 did
not allow him to exceed four as the number in the possession
of one man at a time. But since then further evidence
is available. Thus we read of twelve slaves at once, seven
males and five females, given by a father to his daughter,
at Sippara.<note place='foot'>S. 10.</note> In Assyrian times the number in an average
household rarely exceeds one or two, but we have as many
as thirty mentioned at one time.<note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
No. 424.</note> So in later times there
are generally only one or two in a household, but the number
is occasionally much more.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Price of a slave</note>
As to the value of a slave, we have in very early times
an average set down as twenty shekels, with examples as
low as thirteen shekels. In the time of the Second Dynasty
prices varied from as low as four and a half shekels for a
maid, or ten shekels for a man, up to eighty-four
shekels.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 7.</note>
The Code estimates the average value of a slave as twenty
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
shekels.<note place='foot'>§ 252.</note> In Assyrian times the price of a single male
slave varies from twenty to one hundred and thirty shekels,
but the usual price is thirty shekels. A female slave could
be had for as little as two and a half shekels, but might
cost as much as ninety shekels. A common price was
thirty shekels. In later Babylonian times also, prices vary
widely, but the commonest price and usual pledge-value
was twenty shekels.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XVIII. Land Tenure In Babylonia</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Distinction between real and personal property</note>
The idea of real as opposed to personal property is common
in Babylonian law; for we notice that in the Code,
while certain persons may inherit from the goods of their
parents, they may not inherit land, garden, or house.<note place='foot'>§ 191.</note> He
then had no share in his father's house; he was not one of
the family. The distinction is important, for, as we shall see
later, the word <q>house</q> had a wider signification than mere
bricks and mortar.<note place='foot'>Page 188.</note> It was the ancestral estate. Over it
the family had rights. It went back in default of heirs to
the family of the last owner. We are therefore confronted
with private ownership of land, but also with a sort of
entail.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Entailed property</note>
The amount of land might be increased by purchase, but
there is a strong presumption that it thus became family
property and did not remain at the disposal of the buyer.
For if so, in the case above the law should have stated
that the parent could not donate land that was family property,
but might do so with what he had bought. This does
not exclude the possibility of sale. Only the family had
apparently the right of pre-emption.<note place='foot'>Page 122.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Natural features of Babylonia in their influence on
property rights</note>
In looking back upon the primitive state of the country,
its natural features must be taken into account as helping
to shape the course of development. In such a low-lying
country as the land between the Euphrates and the Tigris,
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
floods naturally occur every year. Every spot of land that
stood above the level of the annual floods was thereby
marked out for a residence. Throughout the literature of
Babylonia the hill or the mountain is a refuge and a place
protected by the gods. But when the floods were gone,
man's great need for his land was water. Hence irrigation
was synonymous with cultivation. The unclaimed land
grew rank with grass and natural food for cattle, but dried
up to dust in the summer. Hence the control of the flood,
its diversion into desired channels, regulation, storage, and
all the processes implied by canals and irrigation were
forced upon the inhabitants of Babylonia by stern necessity.
The only alternative was to migrate with flocks and herds
to higher lands when the floods came.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Primitive land tenure</note>
Settled society was ultimately founded upon the cultivation
of a plain. Every eminence might become a hamlet
occupied by the abodes of men, whose fields were
water meadows. The meadows which grew their corn lay
around the village and below its level; and beyond those
which were needed to grow crops lay the pastures. But
for security the cattle and sheep must come back, before
the floods came, to the village, there to be folded and fed, as
it seems, upon straw and also grain. The land of the village
extended itself in time, as the population grew and needed
more corn. More and more of the unreclaimed land beyond
the cornfields was brought into cultivation and the flocks
went farther afield for pasture. This continued until the
pastures forming the outlying ring had met the pastures of
another village.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ownership of cultivated land</note>
Such is an ideal sketch of the growth of land tenure.
But in historical times this simplicity had vanished. Land
was owned, not merely held. It does not appear that pasture
was owned, even as late as the First Dynasty of Babylon.
It seems that the flocks were confided to shepherds,
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
who were bound to bring them back from the pastures and
expected to account for all they took out and for a reasonable
increase in the flock from breeding. The pasture was
common land; at any rate, to the sheep-owners of the same
village. No one claims to buy and sell pasture land, only
cultivated land, fields, gardens, and plantations, ultimately
irrigated land. But unreclaimed land, that is, such as only
required cultivation to make it fields and gardens, is often
sold, or let, to be reclaimed. Was this a trespass on the
pasture held in common? If so, it was not resented as
such. We do not know yet how a man acquired a title to
such unreclaimed land. Perhaps to have brought it into
cultivation sufficed originally to establish title.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theoretical ownership of the land by the local deity</note>
A settled hamlet soon had its temple. Some think that
the god was ideally landlord of all the village land and
that every title represented simply the rental of the land
from the nominal owner. We do indeed find the temples
as owners of vast estates and, like monastic institutions in
the Middle Ages, letting lands and houses. To the temples
poor men went for temporary accommodation for sowing,
for wages at harvest-time, and for ransom from the enemy.
These they had a right by custom to receive without paying
interest. Undoubtedly the temples became the first
centres of progressive civilization. The <foreign rend='italic'>patêsi</foreign>,
as chief-priest of the god, was the regent of the community. In
process of time, as villages combined and grew into towns
and districts, the <foreign rend='italic'>patêsi</foreign>,
in virtue of his town's supremacy,
became the king, who, as regent of the state and representative
of the gods, owned all. We know that, in later times,
the king in Babylon was the adoptive son of Bel-Merodach.<note place='foot'>Z.
A., iii., 369.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Private ownership absolute in historical periods</note>
In historical times no such conditions prevail. Doubtless
the tribal ownership had become theoretically transferred
to the god, or to the town. That the town had a
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
theoretical personality of its own is clear enough from the
oaths sworn to confirm a sale. Men swore by the gods, the
king, and also by Sippara, or Kar Sippara. But there is no
indication that points to the god, or the town, or the king
as having any power to intervene to prevent a sale, or to
claim payment for consent. It is clear that the land was
sold subject to its dues, and they were many. But the
private ownership, subject to such reservation, was absolute.
The one danger to a purchaser was that the family of
the seller should claim a right of redemption and annul the
sale. Against this the seller undertook to indemnify him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Right to retain ancestral estates</note>
Exact statements as to the rights possessed by the family
to reclaim land sold by a member of the family are not to
be found, but they are to be inferred with certainty from a
few notices which we have. Thus,<note place='foot'>M. A.
P., 42.</note> a man claimed a certain
plot of land as ancestral domain which two others had sold.
There are several such cases among the legal decisions of
the First Dynasty of Babylon. In most of the Assyrian
deeds of sale we have a long list of representatives of the
seller, who are explicitly bound not to interfere and attempt
to upset the sale.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., § 600.</note>
Their right existed or they would not
be called upon to enter into a contract nor to insist upon it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Different kinds of real property</note>
From the point of view of the ancient Babylonian, as
from that of the modern lawyer, there was a great similarity
about all classes of real property. The deeds of sale or
conveyances, as well as the leases, treated them with much
the same formula. It was the land which was the main
consideration. It was as land, built upon indeed, but
essentially as land, that the house was sold. The house is
rarely described by what to modern views would be its
most important features, the number of stories, rooms, conveniences,
and the like. Instead its area was stated. This
is remarkable, as we do not buy houses by the area. We
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
need not suppose that the building actually covered all the
land sold. In fact, we often see that it had a garden.
But it was <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu epšu</foreign>,
a <q>built-on plot</q> of land, according
to the Babylonian conveyancer. Perhaps there was in this
usage a recollection of how fast the Babylonian house of
sun-dried brick sank down to a mound of clay, perhaps,
too, a far-off echo of the nomad's scorn for the town-dweller,
in both cases a recognition that the land was the one thing
permanent, the one thing that could not <q>run away.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Terms used in descriptions of real property</note>
The plot of land was the <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>,
Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>beth</foreign>, represented
by the Sumerian <hi rend='italic'>Ê</hi>. When it had the additional advantage
of a house upon it, it was <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu epšu</foreign>,
a <q>built-on plot.</q> Gradually the edifice, in towns at least, absorbed the whole
significance, and in common parlance <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>
meant a <q>house,</q> but in legal phraseology it always retained its inclusive
meaning of the plot of land. Even as late as the Assyrian
Empire it retained some shade of a still earlier meaning,
that of a plot, parcel, or share, just what it meant when the
first settlers divided the land among them. Thus one
might use <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> of a
<q>lot</q> of slaves, or of a lot of land including
its slaves and cattle. That <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> is to be referred to
a root <foreign rend='italic'>banû</foreign>, <q>to make,</q>
may still be true, though <foreign rend='italic'>banû</foreign>
cannot have come to mean <q>build</q> when <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> was
formed from it. If <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>
was originally the <q>house,</q> perhaps only
a tent-house, then it could mean all that constituted the
house, the man's house in a wider sense, as in tribe names,
like Bît Adini or the phrase, <q>House of Israel.</q> But
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>, when used of a house,
does not carry with it the implication
of bricks and mortar, only of a fixed site occupied for
dwelling. The edifice was implied by the addition <foreign rend='italic'>epšu</foreign>,
marking the site <q>built upon.</q> So a house was <q>landed
property</q>; land was of various sorts, one of which is
<q>built on land.</q> To be accurate one must also specify the
kind of building.
</p>

<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>

<p>
The field was called <foreign rend='italic'>eḳlu</foreign> (compare Acel-dama, <q>the
field of blood</q>), denoted by the Sumerian <hi rend='italic'>A-ŠAG-GA</hi>. The term
does not denote open waste land, but a cultivated plot.
Indeed, it is probable that its Sumerian name implies <q>irrigation.</q>
In any case it was fenced, if only by a raised
ridge; it was cultivated and watched over; the birds were
scared away, robbers and stray animals driven off. So
much at least is expressed in as many words in the undertakings
of tenants to treat a field properly. The field was
also <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> as land, usually
<q><foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>, so much
<foreign rend='italic'>eḳlu</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The garden was reckoned as land, but here a fuller
specification was needed. For a plot of land, a garden,
<foreign rend='italic'>kirû</foreign>
was not exact enough. It was usual to designate further
of what sort it was, whether vegetable garden, orchard,
or palm-grove. The scribe would even add <q>planted with
such and such a crop.</q> The term might include vineyards.
In many cases the actual number of bushes, or fruit-trees, or
vine-stocks, would be named. But it was always primarily
land, and as such <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>, with the qualifications
enumerated.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Systems of land measures: (1) computation by area</note>
For land measures there were two systems in use, one
purely areal, the other with a reference to the average yield.
In the former case the scale of measures was discovered
and formulated by Dr. G. Reisner, in the <hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte
Berliner Akademie</hi>, 1897, p. 417 f., and is completely known.
In this scale <hi rend='italic'>1 GAN = 1,800 SAR</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>1 SAR = 60 GIN</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>1 GIN =
180 ŠE</hi>. We do not know how these words <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>GIN</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi>
were read; they may be ideograms or Sumerian words.
There was also a very large measure of area, <hi rend='italic'>3,600
GAN</hi>, perhaps called a <foreign rend='italic'>karu</foreign>. Mr. Thureau-Dangin has
further shown that the <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> was the square of the measure
<hi rend='italic'>GAR-DU</hi>, which seems at one time to have measured
<hi rend='italic'>12 U</hi>.
The <hi rend='italic'>U</hi> is often taken to be a cubit, but seems at this time
to have been nine hundred and ninety millimetres, which is
sometimes called <q>a double cubit.</q> On these suppositions
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
the <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> would be a square, each side measuring about
twenty-two yards, about one-tenth of an acre, or four ares
on the metrical system. But it is certain that both in early
times and during the First Dynasty of Babylon the <hi rend='italic'>GAR</hi>
was only <hi rend='italic'>12 U</hi>, and the <hi rend='italic'>U</hi>,
if a cubit, would not be much over eighteen inches.
This would make the <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> a square
of about eighteen feet on each side. The fact that a <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>
was a fairly common size for a house seems rather against
the smaller area. What is yet wanted is some cuneiform
statement of the size or area of something which can be
exactly identified and measured. With further exploration
this is almost sure to be found.<note place='foot'>Cf. also Appendix.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>(2) Computation by an average yield</note>
The other system applied to land the names of measures
of capacity used for measuring crops. We read of so many
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of land,
where <hi rend='italic'>1 GUR = 300 ḲA</hi>, as shown
by Dr. Reisner. We may guess that a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of land was
so called because it took a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn to sow it, or because
it yielded a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn as an average harvest.
These are mere guesses and we must remain in ignorance
until further evidence connects a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of land on one side
with its length and breadth, or some other relation between
the <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> can be deduced. Then we
shall want to know the size of the <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn, of which
at present we have no knowledge. But already in Susa a
broken pot has been found with its original contents marked
upon it. When others are found, from which an approximate
estimate of contents can be made, and an inscription
read giving the capacity, we shall be able to make a definite
statement. At present the data are insufficient and what
the metrologists write is only ingenious speculation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Descriptions and plans of plots of land</note>
A piece of land had, so to speak, an individuality of its
own. Once marked out, and that probably from time immemorial,
it was rarely divided. It seems probable that
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
corn-land at any rate was divided into long, narrow strips.
But the plots became gradually of all sizes and shapes,
as the many plans of estates show. The lengths of the
sides are usually given on such plans, and much labor has
been expended with small result on reconciling the given
dimensions with the area ascribed to the plot. But it is certain
that these were often recorded merely for purposes of
identification. The area of the field was well known, and its
average crop also, without any need of resort to calculations.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Boundary-stones</note>
These plots often bear their owner's name, and that long
after he had passed away. The boundary-stones of the field
were sacred. Not a few were inscribed with some sort of
history of the plot. Especially was this the case when the
land was granted to fresh owners, by sale, or charter. No
inconsiderable portion of what we know of history is derived
from inscribed boundary-stones. They are the oldest
monuments and rarely deeply buried. Hence they are easy
to find. They have even been brought to London, as ship's
ballast, in times before they could be read. They would be
invaluable, if found <hi rend='italic'>in situ</hi>, for a modern survey of the
country and a reconstruction of its ancient history. As a
rule they are splendidly preserved.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inviolability of landmarks</note>
<note place='margin'>Encroaching on the highway</note>
In ancient days great importance was attached to their
preservation. The kings taxed their powers of cursing in
order to terrify men from removing their neighbor's landmark.
The dangers to the stone contemplated were its removal
to another place, its being thrown into the water, or
into the fire, its being built into a wall,<note place='foot'>Melishiḫu.</note>
being buried in the dust, placed where it cannot be seen, put in a house of
darkness,<note place='foot'>Merodoch-baladan I.</note>
erased and overwritten with other records.<note place='foot'>Marduk-nâdin-aḫi.</note>
Akin to the crime of encroaching upon old landmarks was that of
building upon or otherwise encroaching on the highway.
To do this might subject the builder to the danger of being
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
hanged, as a warning on a gallows erected above his
own house.<note place='foot'>I. R. 7, 12 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The king's power over land</note>
That the land was sold subject to certain territorial obligations,
we can glean from many hints. One of the most
important is that, when a favorite, or well-deserving official,
had acquired a large estate, the king by charter granted him
an immunity from these obligations. These charters were
often inscribed on large blocks of stone or water-worn pebbles
of great size, and seem to have been set up as boundary-stones.
Some were reproduced from tablets written
on clay.<note place='foot'>D. E. P., ii., 91.</note>
They are very numerous and in some periods of
the history are the only monuments that have reached us.
A glance through any history of Babylonia will show the
reader how much depends on them. But here our only
concern is with the light they throw on land tenure and its
conditions. One of the points which at once becomes clear
is that, although the king was representative of the god and
titular head of all the tribes, he could not appropriate land
just where he chose. Manistusu, King of Kish, when he
was seeking to acquire a fine estate to present to his son,
Mesilim, had to buy land at what seems to have been an
average price. He paid for the land in corn at three and
one-third <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn per <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>,
the <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> being worth one
shekel of silver. This was the price. But, as was usual
later in private purchases, a present to the former owner
was given. The list of these presents is most interesting,&mdash;silver
and copper vessels and rich vestments being the chief
items. Of great importance is the reference to the leading
men of each hamlet as sellers. The king's own land was a
definite area, so definite as to be cited as a boundary.<note place='foot'>Scheil,
<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Délégation en Perse</hi>, Tome II.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Recognition of private rights of possession</note>
A celebrated passage in Sargon's cylinder<note place='foot'>I. R. 36,
40-42.</note> says, <q>according
to the interpretation of my name, Sharru-kînu, righteous
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
king, which bade me observe right and justice, repel the
impious, not oppress the weak; as the great gods had bidden
me, I gave money for the pieces of land, of each city;
according to written contracts, in silver and bronze, to their
owners, in order to do no injustice; and to those who would
not take money,<note place='foot'>Like Araunah the
Jebusite.</note> a field for a field, where they preferred, I
gave.</q> That this was no idle boast is proved from the
tablet which records how Sargon, in the year <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 713, having
taken possession of some lands in Maganuba to form
part of his new city of Dûr-Sargon, found that he was displacing
an old endowment given by Adadi-nirâri to the god
Ashur. It was held by a family descended from the original
recipients. Sargon increased their holding and charged
it with an increased monthly offering to the
temple.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 809.</note> He
gave <q>field for field,</q> but also added largely to the endowments.
He acted much the same in Babylonia, where the
Suti had encroached upon the lands of the people. He
drove out the invaders, restored the lands, but laid them
under obligations, <foreign rend='italic'>kidinûtu</foreign>, making them render a monthly
due to the temples, as before.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Royal grants to temples and favorites</note>
On the other hand, we find that the kings granted large
grants of land to temples and private persons. From what
source these grants were made does not appear. Probably
from his own personal property. The property so presented
was free of imposts. But we may not assume that the king
was always the poorer. The beneficiary may have bought
the land and presented it to the king, to be received back
free of imposts in perpetuity.
</p>

<p>
Thus, Nazimaruttash<note place='foot'>Scheil,
<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Délégation en Perse</hi>, Tome
II.</note> presents a large estate to Merodach,
and another to Kashakti-Shugab, his servant. Kurigalzu<note place='foot'>Idem.</note>
granted an estate to Eṭir-Marduk for his conduct in a war
against Assyria, and Bitiliashu confirmed it. A coppersmith
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
who fled from the land of Ḥanigalbat made a fine specimen
of his work for Bitiliashu, and the king rewarded him with a
grant of land.<note place='foot'>Scheil, <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires
de la Délégation en Perse</hi>, Tome II., p. 95.</note>
Adadi-shum-uṣur made another grant of
land to an unknown servant of his.<note place='foot'>Idem,
p. 97.</note> Melishiḫu made a grant
of land to his son, Merodach-baladan I.,<note place='foot'>Idem,
pp. 99 ff.</note> and granted it exemption
from all imposts. Another grant he made to a
servant of his.<note place='foot'>Idem, p. 112.</note>
So when Shamû and Shamûa, his son, two
priests of Eria in Elam, fled from their own king and took
refuge with Nebuchadrezzar I., he espoused their cause,
plundered Elam, brought back their god, Eria, to Babylon,
and they having taken the hands of Bêl, the king granted
them an estate in Babylonia and freed it from
imposts.<note place='foot'>C. T., ix., No. 92987.</note>
Nabû-aplu-iddina granted an estate to a namesake of his,
which, however, seems to have been claimed as ancestral
property.<note place='foot'>C. T., ix., No. 90922.</note>
Melishiḫu granted lands to Ḥasardu, a servant
of his.<note place='foot'>K. B., iv., pp. 57 ff.</note>
Merodach-baladan I. granted lands to Marduk-zâkir-shumi.<note place='foot'>K.
B., iv., pp. 60 ff.</note>
Marduk-nâdin-aḫi granted Adadi-zêr-iḳisha, for
his services against Assyria, lands in the district of Bît-Ada,
which seem to have been ancestral domains of one Ada.<note place='foot'>K.
B., iv., pp. 68 ff.</note> Some fragments of clay copies
of similar grants by Adadi-nirari,<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 651-56.</note>
Tiglath-pileser III.,<note place='foot'> A. D. D., Nos. 658, 659.</note>
Ashurbânipal,<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 646-48.</note>
and Ashur-eṭil-ilâni<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 649, 650.</note>
are preserved in the British Museum's Collections
from Nineveh. They all appear to record grants to favorite
officials, who had deserved well of the king.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Restoration of ancestral estates</note>
The king also appears as not only confirming grants made
by predecessors, but as restoring ancestral property, or
temple endowments, which had come into other hands, on
suit of the legal descendants of the original owners. Thus,
certain land which had come into the possession of Târim-ana-ilishu
and Ur-bêlit-muballiṭat-mîtûti, was claimed by
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
Marduk-kudur-uṣur in the reigns of Adadi-shum-iddina and
Adadi-nâdin-aḫi, and finally granted him in perpetuity by
Melishiḫu.<note place='foot'>K. B., iii., pp. 154
ff.</note> The land which Gulkishar, King of the Sea
Land, gave to a goddess had remained in her possession 696
years, until, in the time of Nebuchadrezzar I., the Governor of
Bît Sin-mâgir had secularized it. Bêl-nâdin-apli restored it.<note place='foot'>K.
B., iv., p. 64.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Granting of especial privileges</note>
A rather different grant was made by Nebuchadrezzar I.
to Ritti-Marduk for his services against Elam. This faithful
vassal had been governor of a district on the borders of
Elam, but the privileges of his country had been much curtailed
by a neighboring King of Namar. They were now
restored and apparently augmented. They were, that the
King of Namar had no right of entry, could not levy taxes
on horses, oxen, or sheep, nor take dues from gardens and
date-plantations; could not make bridges nor open roads.
The Babylonians, or men of Nippur, who came to live there
were not to be impressed for the Babylonian army. Further,
the towns of the district were freed from dues to the
Babylonian governors.<note place='foot'>K. B., iii., pp.
164 ff.</note> Marduk-nâdin-aḫi in his first year
remitted some obligations on an unknown estate.<note place='foot'>K.
B., iv., pp. 90 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Temple endowments</note>
Of another kind are the monuments recording the actual
endowments of temples by certain kings. A very fine example
is the stone enclosed in a clay coffer referring to the
endowments of the temple of Shamash at Sippara. It records
the restorations made by Simmash-shiḫu, É-ulmash-shâ-kin-shum,
Nabû-aplu-iddina, and Nabopolassar at wide
intervals. There are, however, no lands concerned.<note place='foot'>K.
B., iii., pp. 174 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>An illustration</note>
A very archaic tablet in the E. A. Hoffman Collection,
the General Theological Seminary, New York City,
published in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>,<note place='foot'>Vol. xxiii., pp. 19 ff.</note>
which seems to be older than the celebrated Blau monuments
and which Professor G. A. Barton would date about
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
5500 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, deals directly with a presentation of land to a
temple. In it the area of the land is given in <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> and the
sides in figures only, probably denoting the lengths in <hi rend='italic'>U</hi>.
Being written in very archaic, semi-picture writing, and
some of the signs not yet being identified with certainty, it
will not do to build much upon it. All the sides but one
appear to be thirty-six thousand and fifty, that one being
thirty-six thousand, while the full area is three thousand
and five <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>. This gives the <hi rend='italic'>GAR</hi>
as roughly = fifteen <hi rend='italic'>U</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The metayer system</note>
Land was let under a variety of systems of tenure. The
metayer system was one of the most common and persistent.
The use of this term is justified by the similarity of actual
cases to what is known to prevail in Italy, under this name.
It is a co-operative system. The landlord not only allows
his land to be cultivated for a consideration, but finds the
means to meet expenses. He provides bullocks, tools, seed,
and many other things, according to the usage of the locality.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Illustrations from the Code</note>
In the Code of Ḥammurabi we have proof of the existence
of the system. A man finds<note place='foot'>§ 253.</note> his tenant tools, oxen,
and harness, but hires him to reside on the field and do the
work. Actual examples are rare among the contemporary
contracts. But Amat-Shamash, a votary, let out,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Six oxen, among them two cows; an irrigator, Amêl-Adadi; two
tenders of an ox-watering machine, his nephews; three watering-machines
for oxen; a female servant who tended the machines; half
a <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of land for corn-growing; to Gimillu and Ilushu-banî. They
shall make the yield of the field according to the average (?). They
shall cause the corn to grow and measure it out to Amat-Shamash,
daughter of Marduk-mushallim. In the time of harvest they shall
measure out the corn to Amat-Shamash.</q>
</quote>

<p>
In spite of several obscurities due to uncertain readings,
which render the translation doubtful in places, this must
be regarded as a good example of the kind.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 509.</note>
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>From the Assyrian period</note>
There are fewer data from the Assyrian period, but the
frequent loans, <foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi</foreign>,
without any interest, at seed-time
or harvest, may be due to this relation between landlord
and tenant.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., p. 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>From the Persian period</note>
The best example is to be found in the time of Cyrus,<note place='foot'>Cyr. 26.</note>
where a certain Shulâ proposes to take the fields of Shamash,
in the district of Birili, in the county of Sippara.
It was sixty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn-land. The temple was to find him
twelve oxen, eight laborers (literally irrigators), three iron
ploughs, four harrows (or hoes), and five measures of seed-corn,
which also included food for the laborers and fodder
for the oxen. At the end of the year he was to hand over
three hundred <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn as the temple share.
</p>

<p>
Another good example from the time of Artaxerxes I.<note place='foot'>Hilprecht,
B. E. P., ix., p. 40.</note> relates to the assignment of two trained irrigation-oxen and
seven <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn for seed by a member of the Murashû
firm to three brothers, who undertake to pay seventy-five
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi> for three years.
It does not appear that they hired the land as well. Here the hirer returns
more than ten times his loan as yearly rent.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The system of shares</note>
The usual method of hiring land was on shares. The
Code contemplates that this would be for a proportion fixed
by contract, either one-half or one-third of the produce
going to the owner, in the case of a field or irrigated
meadow and two-thirds in the case of a garden.<note place='foot'>§§
46, 64.</note> The difference was due to the fact that in the former case the
owner furnished the land only, possibly with its water-supply;
in the latter case he also furnished the plants. In
the contemporary contracts we have but few cases where
the crop is shared. In these cases the owner and tenant
share equally.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 76,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 460.</note>
The tenant was also to erect a <foreign rend='italic'>manaḫtu</foreign>, or
<q>dwelling.</q> It was needful that he should reside on the
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
property to take care of the crop. This was stipulated
for and the clause added that he should hand over the
dwelling to the landlord. For such dwellings compare
the <q>cottage in the wilderness</q> of Isaiah 1. 8.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Duties of tenants</note>
The tenant, of course, was bound to cultivate the land.
The duties which fell to his share were <q>to plough, harrow,
weed, irrigate, drive off birds,</q><note place='foot'>M.
A. P., p. 12, note 3, p. 143, No. 77.</note> but these duties are
but rarely stipulated. The Code protects the tenant,
however,<note place='foot'>§ 42.</note>
from any unfair compulsion in the matter, so long as
the landlord gets his fair rent.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fixed rental</note>
Fields were also let at a fixed rent, usually payable in
kind. The contracts of the First Dynasty of Babylon give
a large number of examples of this sort. The kinds of
field are distinguished as <hi rend='italic'>AB-SIN</hi>,
or <foreign rend='italic'>šerû</foreign>,
and <hi rend='italic'>KI-DAN</hi>.
The average rent for the former was eight <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn per
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>; of the latter, eighteen
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> per <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>. The former
class may include land with corn standing upon it, or
simply corn-land; the latter land as yet unbroken, or
fallow. The latter class seems to have been much more
fertile.
</p>

<p>
This rent later became more fixed because the average
yield per area was set down in the lease and the yield in
corn was estimated in money according to the ordinary
value of corn. Thus the rent is stated to be so much
money.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Improving lease</note>
Land was often let to reclaim, or plant. The Code lays
down as law what was evidently a common practice. In
the case of waste land given to be reclaimed the tenant was
rent free for three whole years. In the fourth year he paid
a fixed rent in corn, ten <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> per
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>.<note place='foot'>§ 44.</note> Land let to be
turned into a garden was rent free for four years. In the
fifth year the tenant shared the produce equally with the
landlord.<note place='foot'>§ 60.</note>
</p>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<p>
Contracts illustrating this form of lease are quite common
in the time of the First Dynasty of Babylon.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Manorial obligations</note>
Freedom from various obligations might be granted by
royal charter. In fact, it is from these charters that we
know of the existence of the obligations for the most part.
The land so freed was called <foreign rend='italic'>zakû</foreign>. Land sold is often
said to be <foreign rend='italic'>zakû</foreign>, and we may suppose it was so because
it had once been freed by charter. But this is not quite certain.
The charter was granted to a person and his heirs. Doubtless,
as long as they held it, it would be free, but it is not
clear that they could sell it as freed forever. But we only
know that some land was free. On whom then fell the
obligations? So far as they were due to the king, they
may have been abolished, but such obligations as repairs of
the canal banks must surely have been taken up by others.
If not, the granting of charters must have been a fruitful
source of trouble and distress to the land.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their basis in the obligation of fair maintenance</note>
The obligations were of various kinds. Some were directly
extensions of the duty of a tenant to exercise proper
care of the estate. A very prominent duty was the care of
the canals. To see that they were kept in proper order
was the mark of good government. To allow them to fall
into disrepair was probably the result of weak government,
or the exhaustion due to defeat in war. But it very soon
led to the impoverishment of the country. The Code contemplates
the care of the canal banks, or dikes, as the duty
of the land-owner adjoining.<note place='foot'>§
53.</note> It holds him responsible for
any damage done to the neighbors' crops by his neglect to
close a breach, or leaving the feed-pipe running beyond the
time needed to water his field. But the canal was also
liable to silt up or become choked with water-weeds, and
the care of dredging it out was that of the district governor.
He might carry out this duty by summoning the riparian
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
owners to clean out the bed of the canal,<note place='foot'>K.
L. Ḥ., p. xxxvii.</note> or by a levy for
the purpose. Soldiers, or at any rate, forced labor,
might be used.<note place='foot'>Ib., p. 16.</note>
Later, in the time of Nebuchadrezzar I.,
we find men, hired for the purpose, called <foreign rend='italic'>ḳallê nâri</foreign>, or
canal laborers.<note place='foot'>C. T., IX., No. 92987.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1="XIX. The Army, Corvee, And Other Claims For Personal Service"/>
<head>XIX. The Army, <hi rend='italic'>Corvée</hi>, And Other Claims For Personal
Service</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The levy</note>
There was always a militia, <foreign rend='italic'>Landwehr</foreign>, or territorial levy
of troops. Each district had to furnish its quota. These
are called <foreign rend='italic'>ṣâbê</foreign>, or
<foreign rend='italic'>ummanâte</foreign>. We have no direct statements
about them, but a great multitude of references.
They were called out by the king, <foreign rend='italic'>adki ummanâtîa</foreign>, <q>I
called out my troops,</q> is a stock phrase. The calling out
was the <foreign rend='italic'>dikûtu</foreign>. Not easily to be distinguished from this
was the <foreign rend='italic'>šisîtu</foreign> of the
<foreign rend='italic'>nâgiru</foreign>. That officer seems to have
been an incarnate War Office. It is not clear whether he
always acted solely for military purposes. The <q>levy</q>
seems to have been equally made for public works. The
men were <q>the king's men,</q> whether they fought or built.
The obligation to serve seems to have chiefly affected the
slaves and the poorer men, the <foreign rend='italic'>muškênu</foreign>. In the Code of
Ḥammurabi<note place='foot'>§ 16.</note> it
was punishable with death to harbor a defaulter
from this <q>levy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Forced labor</note>
Claims might also be made for work on the fields. This
was called <foreign rend='italic'>ḫubšu</foreign> and we know little about it more than
that Sargon II. charged his immediate predecessors on the
throne with having outraged the privileges of the citizens
of the old capital Asshur, by putting them to work on the
fields.
</p>

<p>
The obligation to provide a soldier for the state was tied
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
to a definite plot, or at any rate, to all estates of a certain
size. The <foreign rend='italic'>ilku</foreign>, or obligation of the land, was
transferred with it. In Assyrian times, the military unit was the bowman
and his accompanying pikeman and shield-bearer.
The land which was responsible for furnishing a <q>bow,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>ḳaštu</foreign>, in this fashion,
was itself called a <q>bow</q> of land.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., ii., p. 172.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Exemption of certain cities</note>
Some cities claimed for their citizens a right of exemption
from <q>the levy.</q> In Sargon's time, we find that cities like
Asshur had been subjected by Shalmaneser IV. to this
service, and Sargon restored their rights. He freed them
from <foreign rend='italic'>dikûtu mâti</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>šisîtu nagiri</foreign>, and
<foreign rend='italic'>miksu kâri</foreign>.<note place='foot'>A.
O. F., i., p. 404.</note> The city had not known
the <foreign rend='italic'>ilku dupsikku</foreign>. Later, we find an officer,
Tâb-ṣil-ešarra,<note place='foot'>H. A. B. L., p.
89.</note> complaining that, when he was desirous of
doing some repairs to the queen's palace in Asshur, of
which city he was <foreign rend='italic'>šaknu</foreign>, Sargon's freeing of the city had
rendered the <foreign rend='italic'>ilku</foreign> of the city unavailable to
him.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., ii., p. 174 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the so-called <q>Tablet of warnings to kings against
injustice,</q><note place='foot'>C. T., xv., 50.</note>
the cities of Borsippa, Nippur, and Babylon are
freed from <foreign rend='italic'>dupsikku</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>šisîtu nâgiri</foreign>. This was drawn
up in the time of Ashurbânipal, but whether it was original
with him is not clear. At any rate, later, under Cambyses
and Darius, these cities were again subject to the <q>levy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Classes subject to the levy</note>
This obligation to perform forced labor, or serve in the
army, fell on the agricultural population primarily. Indeed,
it seems that the men who discharged it might be
called upon to do field labor, and it was an aggravation of
the insults put upon the old capital Asshur, that its citizens
were set to do field labor.<note place='foot'>A. O. F., i.,
p. 404 f.</note> On all country estates, there
were a number of serfs, <foreign rend='italic'>glebae adscripti</foreign>, sold with the
estate, but not away from it. These, as the Ḥarran census
shows, often had land of their own. But they were bound
to till the soil for the owner. They included the
<foreign rend='italic'>irrišu</foreign>, or
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
<note place='margin'>Service at the royal weaving establishments</note>
irrigator, the husbandman in charge of date-plantations,
gardens, or vineyards. From these were drawn the men
who served in the army as <q>king's men,</q> and on public
works. They seem to have been liable to five or six terms
of service, season's work probably, or campaigns, and then
were free. At any rate, the heads of families seem to be
free. The daughters as well as sons were subject to service,
probably to repair to the great weaving houses in the
towns. We read of these weaving establishments from
early times. M. Thureau-Dangin has called attention to
their occurrence in the Telloh tablets of the Second Dynasty
of Ur.<note place='foot'>Rev. Ass., III., p. 140.</note>
</p>

<p>
The amounts of wool assigned to different cities to work
up are the subject of many tablets.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., 951 ff.</note> In the great cities,
the temples or the palaces were the home of this industry;
but quantities of stuff were served out under bond to
private establishments to be worked up and returned or
paid for. The work on these industries constituted the
<foreign rend='italic'>amat šarrûti</foreign>, or obligation
to serve as <q>king's handmaid.</q>
It lay also upon slaves. It is doubtful whether
the obligation included domestic service. From the second
Babylonian Empire we have a host of tablets relating to
these weaving accounts. They will be found fully discussed
by Dr. Zehnpfund in his <hi rend='italic'>Weberrechnungen</hi>.<note place='foot'>B.
A. S., i., pp. 492-536, 632-36.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Obligations of slave to the state</note>
The married slave, even in the city, usually lived in his
own house. His children were born to slavery, but were
usually not separated in early life from their parents.
They entered their master's service, and might be sold when
grown up. They might learn a trade and so earn a living,
paying a fixed sum to their master. They might become
agricultural laborers, and so attain a fixity of tenure as
serfs. But on all these subject classes, slaves, whether
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
domestic or living out, serfs, and artisans, there lay the obligation
to do forced work for the king. After a certain
number of terms of service, they were exempt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Public obligations</note>
The obligations to public institutions which existed in
Babylonia in later times have not yet been made the subject
of a thorough study. Kohler and Peiser have noted several
of the more important indications, and to them we owe
what has been done up to the present.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>To take a share in the expense of warfare</note>
The most noteworthy obligation was what they call the
<foreign rend='italic'>ḳablu</foreign>. This has the same sign as so commonly used in the
phrase, <foreign rend='italic'>ḳablu u taḫâzu</foreign>, for <q>war and fighting.</q>
But it is also the ideogram for <foreign rend='italic'>šisîtu</foreign>,
the call of the <foreign rend='italic'>nâgiru</foreign> to war or
the corvée. There is no doubt that it indicates the levy for
war. The <foreign rend='italic'>rikis ḳabli</foreign> was the money due from certain
persons to furnish a soldier for the war. Thus we have seventy
shekels paid to a certain man, in the fifth year of Darius, to
go to the city Shiladu.<note place='foot'>Dar.
164.</note> Again, a certain Bêl-iddin had to
find twenty-five shekels to pay a substitute to go for him to
the presence of the king.<note place='foot'>Dar.
156.</note> Another man paid the wages of a
soldier for two years.<note place='foot'>Dar. 481.</note>
This was an <foreign rend='italic'>æs militare</foreign>. In another
case we find the <foreign rend='italic'>rikis ḳabli</foreign> for a horseman for a certain
troop, for three years. It consisted of an ass worth fifty
shekels, thirty-six shekels for its keep, twelve coats, twelve
breastplates (?), twelve <foreign rend='italic'>mušapallatum</foreign>,
twelve leather <foreign rend='italic'>mîṭu</foreign>,
twenty-four shoes, thirty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of oil,
sixty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of bdellium
sixty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of some aromatic, all as equipment,
<foreign rend='italic'>ṣiditum</foreign>, to go
to the camp (?). This may be described as
<foreign rend='italic'>æs equestre</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Dar. 253.</note>
So<note place='foot'>Camb. 276.</note> the burgomaster of Babylon paid
<foreign rend='italic'>rikis ḳabli</foreign> for three years
for a certain soldier, receiving the amount from single citizens.
How this arose, what dues it was a composition for, and
whether it antedates Persian times, are details not yet clear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>To pay dues for the land</note>
Besides the personal obligation to contribute <q>work,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>dullu</foreign>, a liability for contributions in
kind, <foreign rend='italic'>ilku</foreign>, dues from
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
the land, existed. We are in the dark as yet as to the
exact form these took. In the Code, the <foreign rend='italic'>ilku</foreign>, or duty
from an estate held as the benefice of an office, was the fulfilment
of the functions of the office.<note place='foot'>§ 35.</note> The word does not
seem to denote contributions. But the word literally is
what <q>comes</q> of any holding, income, or what is <q>taken</q>
from it. In a charter of Melišhiḫu,<note place='foot'>D. E. P., II.</note> we have a
long list of powers which could be exercised by the king's officials over
land. They are levies or forced contributions of wood,
crops, straw, corn, wagons, harness, asses or men, rights to
abstract water from canals, to drink from the water, to
pasture herbage, or set on the royal flocks or herds, to pasture
sheep, to construct roads or bridges. These are referred
to as either a <foreign rend='italic'>dullu</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>ilku</foreign>. The governor is named
as likely to demand right of pasture for his flocks and herds
or work for roads and bridges. But we are left without
information as to the proportion these levies bore to the
property. All we can conclude is that the king had a right
to impress such things or such labor. Few, if any, other
documents are so full and explicit as to the dues exacted
from the land, but all these dues are mentioned again, one
or two together, in almost all the charters.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temple tithe</note>
This is one of the most important dues from land. It
was paid to the temple. Some are inclined to see it in
the <foreign rend='italic'>niširtu</foreign>, from which many charters exempt land; but
others consider this merely a word for <q>diminution,</q> or
levy in general. There is no means of deciding yet as
to the time at which the tithe first became a fixed institution.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In Assyria</note>
There seems to be no trace in Assyrian times of any payment
of a tithe. The tithe <foreign rend='italic'>rab ešrite</foreign>, which has been rendered
<q>tithe collector,</q> is more likely to be a commander
of ten, a decurion.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., § 236.</note>
</p>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Common among Neo-Babylonians</note>
The evidence for the existence of tithe in the later Babylonian
period is very full. All seem to have paid it, from the
king downward. Nabonidus paid, on his accession, to the
temple at Sippara, five minas of gold. It was a very large
sum, but may have been a sort of succession duty rather
than an income-tax.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 2.</note> It is curious that we also find
Belshazzar named as paying tithe, due from his sister, and that
when the Persian army was already in possession of
Sippara.<note place='foot'>Sayce.</note>
This shows that the Persians were friendly invaders and
respected the rights of private property and of the temples.
Belshazzar also paid tithe, through his major-domo, to Bêl,
Nabû, Nêrgal, and Bêlit of Erech.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 270.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Often paid collectively</note>
It was paid for a group of persons by one of their company,
or perhaps we might say that certain persons collected
tithe from their district and paid it in. Thus we have a
document recording the payment by one man of the tithe
due from a number of shepherds, cultivators, and gardeners,
in the city of Maḫâz-Shamshi.<note place='foot'>Nbk.
220.</note> In the time of Artaxerxes I.,
Hilprecht has shown that in some cases <q>the bow</q> of land
also paid tithe.<note place='foot'>B. E. P., ix., p. 36.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Usually in kind</note>
Tithe was usually paid in kind, on all natural products,
corn, oil, sesame, dates, flour or meal, oxen, sheep, asses,
and the like, but also was liquidated by a money payment.
The tablets relating to it are very numerous, but
in nearly every case amount to no more than a receipt for
its payment.
</p>

<p>
Tithe became property apparently and was negotiable.
So at least appears from Nebuchadrezzar 270. We thus
have property in income from land.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Octroi duties</note>
The various dues, <foreign rend='italic'>miksu</foreign>, seem to have been a sort of
octroi duty. They were levied at the quay, <foreign rend='italic'>miksu kâri</foreign>,
at the ferry, <foreign rend='italic'>miksu nibiri</foreign>. They are only mentioned in
the
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
charters, granting exemptions from them, to certain estates
or their owners. Closely related to these were the
<foreign rend='italic'>mikkasu</foreign>,
which seem to be some sort of due or tax levied upon all
<foreign rend='italic'>naturalia</foreign>, and even upon the dues which were paid into
the temples. We have frequent mention of them in later
times, in the temple accounts.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XX. The Functions And Organization Of The Temple</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The great importance of the temple</note>
The temple exerted an overwhelming financial influence
in smaller towns. Only in certain large cities was it rivalled
by a few great firms. Its financial status was that of the
chief, if not the only, great capitalist. Its political influence
was also great. This was largely enlisted on the side of
peace at home and stability in business.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Varieties and origin of temple dues</note>
The importance of the temple was partially the result of
the large dues paid to it. These consisted primarily of a
<foreign rend='italic'>ginû</foreign>, or fixed
customary daily payment, and a <foreign rend='italic'>sattukku</foreign>, or
fixed monthly payment. How these arose is still obscure.
They were paid in all sorts of natural products, paid in kind,
measured by the temple surveyor on the field. Doubtless,
these were due from temple lands, and grew out of the endowments
given to the temple. These often consisted of
land, held in perpetuity by a family, charged with a payment
to the temple. The land could not be let or sold by the
temple, nor by the family. Such land was usually freed
from all other state dues. The endowment was thus at the
expense of the state. An enormous number of the tablets
which have reached us from the later Babylonian times
concern the payment of these dues. They mostly consisted
of corn and sesame, or other offerings, and the tablets are
receipts for them. In Assyrian times the
<foreign rend='italic'>ginû</foreign> also included
flesh of animals and birds. In some few cases we
have long lists of these daily dues, accompanied by precious
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
gifts in addition. The gifts were perishable, but were accompanied
by a note specifying them, and the good wishes
or purpose of the donor.<note place='foot'>A. D.
D., 998-1092.</note> These notes were preserved as
mementos of the donor's good-will.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temples as owners of rented land</note>
Temples, however, also possessed lands which they could
let. They also held houses which they might
let.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 428, 439.</note> In fact,
the temples could hold any sort of property, but apparently
could not alienate any. Some lands the temple officials administered
themselves, having their own work-people. We
have mention of these lands from the earliest times (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the
very early tablet referred to above),<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg196">196</ref>.</note> right down through the
Sumerian period. We have almost endless temple accounts,
many of which relate to the fields of the temple, giving their
dimensions and situation, with the names of the tenants, or
serfs, and the rents or crops expected of them. Then, in
the First Dynasty of Babylon, we find the lands, gardens,
courts, <hi rend='italic'>et cetera</hi>, of the gods named. We no longer have
the temple accounts, but the private business transactions
of the citizens, whose neighbors are often the gods themselves,
as direct land-owners. In Assyrian times the mention
of temple lands is very common. In later Babylonian
times there is abundant evidence of the same custom. Dr.
Peiser devotes a considerable portion of the introduction to
his <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Verträge</hi> to this subject. How the temple
became possessed of these lands we do not know. We
do know of large gifts of land by kings, rich land-owners
and the like, but we do not know whether originally the
temple started with land. When a king speaks of building
a temple to a god, we may understand that he really rebuilt
it, or erected a new temple on the site. Before kings,
the <foreign rend='italic'>patêsis</foreign> did the
same. But did a <foreign rend='italic'>patêsi</foreign> precede a
temple or <hi rend='italic'>vice versâ</hi>? and did the first founder, or the
town, grant the first temple lands?
</p>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their income from private sources</note>
The temples had further a variable revenue from private
sources. There were many gifts and presents given voluntarily,
often as thank-offerings. The temple accounts give
extensive lists of these from the earliest times to the latest.
They were of all sorts, most often food or money. But
they were often accompanied by some permanent record, a
tablet, vase, stone or metal vessel, inscribed with a votive
inscription. These form our only materials for history in
long spaces of time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Share of the temple in the sacrifices</note>
Sacrifices were, of course, largely consumed by the
offerers and those invited to share the feast. But the temple
took its share. The share was a fixed or customary
right to certain parts. For one example, the temple of
Shamash at Sippara had its fixed share of the sacrifice,
taking <q>the loins, the hide, the rump, the tendons, half the
abdominal viscera and half the thoracic viscera, two legs,
and a pot of broth.</q> The usage was not the same at all
temples. In the temple of Ashur and Bêlit at Nineveh we
have a different list.<note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
Nos. 998-1013, etc.</note> For the parallels with Mosaic ritual,
and the Marseilles sacrificial tablet, see Dr. J. Jeremias,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Cultus Tafel von Sippar</hi>. The list was drawn up
by Nabû-aplu-iddin, King of Babylon <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
884-860.<note place='foot'>Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of Biblical Literature</hi>, xix., p. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes sold for cash</note>
This was of course a variable source of income, depending
upon the popularity of the cult and the population of the district.
It was also perishable and could not be stored. It is
certain that in some cases this source of income was so large
that the temple sold its share for cash.<note place='foot'>Nbk.
213 with Nbk. 396.</note> This must be carefully
distinguished from the <foreign rend='italic'>ginû</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>sattukku</foreign> mentioned
on page 208, which were constant and regular supplies.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temple as a business institution</note>
The temple was also a commercial institution of high efficiency.
Their accumulations of all sorts of raw products
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
were enormous. The temple let out or advanced all kinds
of raw material, usually on easy terms. To the poor, as
a charity, advances were made in times of scarcity or personal
want, to their tenants as part of the metayer system
of tenure, to slaves who lived outside its precincts,
and to contractors who took the material on purely commercial
terms. The return was expected in kind, to the
full amount of advance, or with stipulated interest. Also in
some cases, especially wool and other clothing stuffs, in made-up
material. Definite fabrics, mostly garments and rugs or
hangings, were expected back. Some quantity was needed
for garments and vestments for temple officials, some for
the gods. But a great deal was used for trade. We have
references to temple treasuries and storehouses from the
earliest times to the latest.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temple as a place of deposit and traffic</note>
The temples did a certain amount of banking business.
By this we mean that they held money on deposit against
the call of the depositor. Whether they charged for safekeeping
or remunerated themselves by investing the bulk
of their capital, reserving a balance to meet calls, does not
yet appear. But the relatively large proportion of loans,
where the god is said to be owner of the money, points to
investment as the source of a considerable income. Here a
careful distinction must be made between the loans without
interest, or with interest only charged in default of
payment to time, and those where interest is charged at
once. The latter are banking business, the former were
probably only the landlord's bounden duty to his tenant
by the custom of his tenure. The temples also bought and
sold for profit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temple staff</note>
The greater officials, of course, appear often at court.
The king was accompanied by a staff of priestly personages.
They frequently appear in the inscriptions and on the monuments.
His court reproduced that of the gods above. The
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
officials in one answered, man for man and office for office,
with those above.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The priestly influence over the king</note>
The king, by his religion, could do nothing without religious
sanction. The support of the priestly party was essential.
In the more unsettled times they were to a great
extent king-makers. To estrange the priests was a dangerous
policy always. Besides their immense wealth they
had the sanctions of religion on their side. To all men
certain things were right, and the priests then had what
right there was on their side. A king was under obligation
to come to Babylon to take the hands of Bêl-Merodach
each New Year's Day. If he did not, he not only
offended the priests, but also committed a wrong in the
eyes of his people.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their influence on the whole predominantly ethical</note>
But the kings were often inclined to rely upon conjurers,
soothsayers, magicians, and the like. It would be a fatal
mistake to confuse these with the priests. The best kings
were those who set their face against magic and supported
the more rational local or national worships. Sargon II.,
Esarhaddon, Nebuchadrezzar II., are examples of the latter,
while Ashurbânipal is a great example of the magic-ridden
kings. Ḥammurabi apparently strove to put down magic.
The eternal struggle between the <q>science</q> (falsely so-called)
of magic and divination on the one hand and the higher
claims of religious duty on the other, is the key to much
that is misunderstood in the politics of the time. It would
be too much to say that the priestly party were always on
the side of morality, or that they were not often allied with
the soothsayers, but it is certain that what ethical progress
there was, was due to them. In religious texts alone have
we aspiration after higher ideals. Who can fancy a wizard
troubled about ethics?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Honors paid to priesthood</note>
The priest proper, <foreign rend='italic'>šangû</foreign>, was a person of the highest
rank. He appears very little on the whole. His chief
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
function was to act as mediator between god and man, as
over the sacrifice offered.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Additional duties</note>
He had public duties outside his priestly office. He inspected
canals.<note place='foot'>Camb. 19.</note> He often acted as a judge.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their college</note>
There was a college of priests attached to some temples,
over which was a <foreign rend='italic'>šangû maḫḫu</foreign> or <q>high-priest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their exact functions uncertain</note>
The general idea that <foreign rend='italic'>mašmašu</foreign>,
<q>charmer</q>; <foreign rend='italic'>kalû</foreign>, <q>restrainer</q>;
(?) <foreign rend='italic'>maḫḫû</foreign>, <q>soothsayer</q>;
<foreign rend='italic'>surru</foreign>; <foreign rend='italic'>lagaru</foreign>;
<foreign rend='italic'>šâ'ilu</foreign>, <q>inquirer</q>;
<foreign rend='italic'>mušêlu</foreign>, <q>necromancer</q>;
<foreign rend='italic'>âšipu</foreign>, <q>sorcerer</q>; all
properly <q>magicians,</q> are subdivisions of the general term
<foreign rend='italic'>šangû</foreign>, is yet to be proved. Except when, in rare cases,
the same man was both, the scribes carefully distinguish
them. The idea seems to arise from the same modern confusion
of thought which starts by calling an unknown
official first a eunuch, then a priest. We do not yet fully
know the functions or methods of these officials. They
remain to be studied.<note place='foot'>Professor H. Zimmern has
made a splendid beginning in his <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
Kenntniss der Babylonischen Religion</hi> by determining the functions
of the <foreign rend='italic'>barû</foreign>, the
<foreign rend='italic'>âsipu</foreign>, and the
<foreign rend='italic'>zammaru</foreign>. He calls them all
<q>priests.</q> But he does not show that either was a
<foreign rend='italic'>šangû</foreign>. It may really be so,
but why confuse what the Babylonians kept distinct?</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The warden</note>
The <foreign rend='italic'>ḳêpu</foreign>, or <q>warden,</q> was over the temple servants.
He let the temple lands. He inspected the temple slaves
and work-people.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 292.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The steward</note>
The <foreign rend='italic'>šatammu</foreign> was over the revenues. This name is
clearly connected with the <foreign rend='italic'>šutummu</foreign> or storehouse.
</p>

<p>
Certain officials, as surveyors or measurers, scribes, <hi rend='italic'>et
cetera</hi>, may have been of priestly rank and held these offices
as well. But as a rule, a man appears with an official title,
without our being able to see whether he was a priest or
not.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The workmen</note>
The temple kept its artificers, who had board and wages.
It had its serfs, or land laborers, not actual slaves, but
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
free except for their duty to the temple. They lived on
the produce of their holdings, subject to a fixed, or produce-rent.
</p>

<p>
There were temple slaves, who performed the menial
offices without wages, but were clothed and fed.
</p>

<p>
Within these classes doubtless came some of those who
appear as slaughterers, water-carriers, doorkeepers, bakers,
weavers, and the like. A temple also had its shepherds,
cultivators, irrigators, gardeners, <hi rend='italic'>et cetera</hi>; but it is far from
easy to determine the exact degree of dependence in each case.
</p>

<p>
The temple even had its own doctor.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 352.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similarity of the temple to the monastic system</note>
In all these cases we may compare the monastic institutions
of the Middle Ages. We are not as a rule able to see
whether they were <q>lay brothers,</q> or had become <q>clerics,</q>
as well as <q>clerks.</q> But there is no sign of celibacy.
Even the priests were married.
</p>

<p>
Attached to the temple were votaries.<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg076">76</ref>.</note> In not a few
cases the above offices might also be held by women, even
such an office as surveyor might be held by a woman.
There were many female <q>clerks.</q> All the temple staff
were maintained by the temple, boarded, fed, and clothed,
at the temple expense. But private persons might undertake
to keep a definite temple official, perhaps were bound
to do so, by the terms of some endowment.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 773.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hereditary rights</note>
The right to serve in certain offices was hereditary in
some families. As these multiplied, the office was held in
turn by members of the family for a short time, so that it
may well be that an individual priest only exercised his
functions for a very limited part of the year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Origin of clan names</note>
Great families took their clan name from their office; for
example, the Gula priests in later Babylonian times, or as
the <foreign rend='italic'>mandidu</foreign>, <q>measurer,</q>
or <q>surveyor,</q> attached to a
temple, became a clan name.
</p>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Proprietary rights to share in temple incomes</note>
Hence arose property in temple incomes. That these
were considerable we know from the lists of temple accounts.
These form the bulk of the earliest documents.
From them we learn that each day certain officials received
certain allowances, mostly food and drink. From later documents
we learn that men apparently not connected with
the temple had become lay impropriators of the temple allowances
originally intended only for temple officers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These rights negotiable</note>
The right to receive these was a valuable and negotiable
asset. Thus we read of a right to five days per year in the
temple of Nannar, sixteen days per year in the temple of Bêlit,
and eight days in the shrine of Gula as being the <foreign rend='italic'>namḫar</foreign>
of Sin-imgurâni and Sin-uzili.<note place='foot'>M. A. P.,
41.</note> This was confirmed to them
by a legal decision in the time of Rîm-Sin. We read also
of a right to act as <foreign rend='italic'>šatammu</foreign>,
for six days per month, in the temple of
Shamash.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2175 A.</note> In later times the <foreign rend='italic'>mandidûtu</foreign>,
or surveyorship, to the temple of Anu, Ib, and Bêlit-êkalli, exercised
in the temple, storehouse, and field, was sold, shared,
and pledged.<note place='foot'>P. A. S., II.,
8.</note> Another such right was given on condition
that it was not sold for money, granted to another, pledged,
nor diminished in any way, and should pass to the possessor's
daughter on his death.<note place='foot'>P. A. S., II.,
23.</note> The porter's post at Bâb Salimu
was given as a pledge. Shares in these incomes were
regularly traded in, sold, and pledged.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other endowments of office</note>
The position of a priest, or other official, carried with it
an endowment. On this point the Code is very explicit for
the cases of the <foreign rend='italic'>ridû ṣâbê</foreign>
and the <foreign rend='italic'>bâ'iru</foreign>, officials charged
with the collection of local quotas for the army and public
works. They were recruiting sergeants, press-gang officers,
and post-office officials. The office was endowed by royal
grant. They were liable to be called on in the discharge of
their duties to make lengthy journeys and be absent from
home for a length of time, even years. In their absence,
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
their duties could be delegated to a son, if old enough, otherwise
a substitute was put in. They could claim reinstatement
within a certain time. But their endowment was inalienable
from the office and could not be treated as private
property.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Also the great offices at court</note>
Quite similarly the great state officials in Assyria had
endowments which were not personal, but went with the
office. Thus we learn from the Ḥarran census that certain
lands paid rent or crops to certain offices.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These rights maintained by inheritance</note>
In later times the rights to income are very prominent,
perhaps solely in virtue of the class of documents which has
reached us. Occasionally we are able to learn exactly what
they were. For example, the surveyor for the temple of
Anu had a right to two <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn,
two <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of dates,
fifty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of wheat, six
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of sesame, on every eighteen
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of land. When the corn and dates were harvested, on
one <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>, six <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> were levied.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The relation to the state</note>
It is not clear that a temple had any direct duties to the
state. Peiser thinks that they collected dues for the state.
Certainly they had attached to them the king's storehouses.
Certain amounts were paid in for certain state officials. In
the Code of Ḥammurabi we see that a temple might be
called upon to ransom a member of the town who had been
taken captive.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The loaning of money</note>
In certain circumstances the king's officials might borrow
of the temples.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No.
930.</note> Thus Nikkal-iddina borrowed of the temple
of Bêlit of Akkad a vessel of silver, weight fifteen minas,
when the Elamites invaded the land.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Forced loans</note>
Some kings laid hands on the treasures of the temple
for their own use. Doubtless this was done under bond to
repay. The cases in which we read of such practices are
always represented as a wrong. When Shamash-shûm-ukîn
sent the bribes to the King of Elam, Ummanigash, he spoiled
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
the treasuries of Merodach at Babylon, of Nabû at Borsippa,
and of Nêrgal at Cutha, and this was reckoned one of his
evil deeds, which led to his downfall. But if he had been
successful and had repaid his forced loans, doubtless it
would have been excused, and his memory would have been
blessed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temple a trading institution</note>
Much confusion is introduced by the fact that we do not
know when a temple official acts in his own private capacity
and when on behalf of the temple. The deeds, which
do not expressly state that the money or property belongs
to the god, or the temple, may often be only concerned
with private transactions, but were preserved in the temple
archives on account of the official position of the parties.
But there are plenty of cases, where no doubt exists, to
justify us in regarding the temple as acting in all the capacities
of a private individual, or a firm of traders.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXI. Donations And Bequests</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Alienation of property</note>
Alienation of property might be complete or partial.
Of complete alienation we may instance donation, sale, exchange,
dedication, testament. The latter was rarely complete
in Babylonia. Examples of partial alienation are
loan, lease, pledge, deposit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Importance of the fact of ownership</note>
We may note as a common mark of all these transactions
the care taken to fix and define ownership. The transfer is
<q>from</q> A to B. In early times the property is usually
first stated to belong to A. Then he is often said in Assyrian
times to be the <foreign rend='italic'>bêlu</foreign> of it, its full and legitimate
owner. The new owner had to be satisfied that A was competent to
part with it. This is often made clearer by saying, in later
times, that no one else has any claim upon it. Hence arise
guarantees against defeasor, redemptor, <hi rend='italic'>et cetera</hi>. This subject
of guarantees is most interesting, though often obscure.
The investigation of the varied rights which were likely to
interfere with freedom of transfer is most important.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Peculiar forms of assignments</note>
In certain cases we shall find a sort of hypothecation of
property, as when it is assigned as security, but not given
up. The possession is not free, but it is not alienated. We
have also a <foreign rend='italic'>donatio retento
usufructu</foreign>, which only gives a reversion
of the property. Here also certain rights may be
reserved against the ultimate possessor.
</p>

<p>
Another interesting point is that property may be credited
to a man, and set off against other liabilities, so that he
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
may never actually be in possession, but only nominally
passing it on to others, and even, eventually, it may come
back to the first owner, who may never part with it at all.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Restrictions on free gifts</note>
Undoubtedly men were at liberty in daily life to make
presents one to another. But the rights of the family were
so strong that for the most part all the property of the
parents was jealously regarded as tied to the children, or
other legal heirs. When a man died, his property was divided
according to a rigid law of inheritance. When a
woman left her father's house to be married, the father gave
her the share of his goods which fell to her, without waiting
until his death to divide his substance. In this case she
had nothing further at his death. But the property was
not her husband's, though he and she shared its use; it was
entailed to her children. If she had none, it went back to
her father's house: to her brothers, if she had any, or to her
father's other heirs. Unless a man legally adopted his
natural sons, they did not inherit. Hence neither man nor
woman was wholly free to give. But, hedged about with
consents and reservations, donations took place.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The conditions of any gift</note>
We have a great variety of types of donation, not always
easy to classify, and often obscure, in some details. The
common characteristics are that deeds of gift were duly
executed, sealed, and witnessed; and that the consents of
the parties, whose expectations were thus diminished, or restricted,
had to be obtained.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Establishment of a daughter who became a votary</note>
A daughter might be portioned off for marriage and this
involved a gift, which might be treated as a donation, but
rather comes under the head of marriage-portion, in the
chapter on marriage. Precisely the same portioning took
place when the daughter either became a votary or was dedicated
to the service of a god. Such gifts may be included
here. They usually contain a list of property: sharing
houses, land, slaves, jewels, money, clothes, household furniture,
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
even pots of honey or jars of wine. As a rule, in
our present state of knowledge, nothing that could pretend
to be an accurate translation can be given of the items of
such a gift, only a general idea of the nature of the whole.
Such a gift, however, evidently set the lady up in an establishment
of her own, with all she could require for maintenance
and comfort for the rest of her life.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights in a gift made by a votary</note>
Here these donations split up into separate classes. The
recipient might have only a life interest in her gift, or it
might be hers outright. The latter case could not be presumed.
The heirs of her parents, <q>her father's house,</q>
would maintain their claim at her death, unless they had
specially contracted to waive it. Then the clause was inserted
that she might <q>give her sonship to whomever she
pleased,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>ašar eliša
tâbum aplûtsa inadin</foreign>.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 7.</note> By <q>sonship</q>
is meant <q>heirship.</q> Such cases do not seem common and
are probably to be explained as due to the fact that as a
votary she had no legitimate heir. It is important to note
that there is no hint that, if she died without heirs, the
temple would inherit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Gifts made by a father to a daughter</note>
A modified freedom is allowed by a father who gives his
daughter house, land, sheep, slaves, and the like, but limits
her power of gift to her brothers. But among them she
may <q>give it to him who loves and serves
her.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
675.</note> It is assumed
that one of her brothers will care for her and manage
her estate and be rewarded by the reversion of it. As
a rule, it is only a life interest which the recipient has.
</p>

<p>
A different sort of gift is where the donor reserves to himself
a use of the property as long as he lives, or stipulates
for a life allowance from it. These are usually accompanied
by formal adoption. The recipient is one who has not
already a claim to inherit, but undertakes the care or maintenance
of the donor. Such gifts are best classed under
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
adoption, even where the fact of adoption is not stated.
When a parent makes an arrangement of this kind with a
son or daughter, these were possibly adopted by a previous
act. At any rate, it seems likely that such a child was
either unmarried or again free to wait upon the donor.
But whatever the actual state of relationships, we find a
mother giving property to a daughter, reserving the use of
it as long as she lives.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
39.</note> Similarly a brother undertakes
to give one shekel <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi> to his brother. Here the
grounds of the undertaking are not stated, but a contract to
do this is duly sealed and witnessed.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 6.</note> Further, maintenance
is stipulated for, though the relationship is not stated,
nor grounds given. This may not be based upon a gift,
but follow the order of some judge, for other
reasons.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 324.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pin-money for a wife</note>
The husband might settle upon his wife a fixed amount
of property. This was frequently done and was called the
<foreign rend='italic'>nudunnu</foreign>. It might include a house, two maids, clothes,
jewelry, and household furniture.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2504.</note> Here the sons are expressly
said to have no claim, she may give it to whoever
serves her and <q>as her heart desires.</q> Probably she was a
second wife without children, and is thus secured a life of
comfort and the faithful service of her step-sons. As a rule
these gifts are best considered under the head of marriage,
but they were also free gifts on the donor's part. The wife
in any case had her right to inherit with her step-sons, if
her husband made no such settlement.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Consent of heirs to the disposal of property</note>
The consent of the legal heirs of the donor to such alienation
of their reversionary rights was needed. Thus in one
case, when a man gives his daughter a house, his son appears
as the first witness.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
544.</note> A father and his son give their
daughter and sister a house, which she is free to give to her
son, <q>whom she loves.</q><note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
729.</note> Had the house merely come to
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
her as her share in the usual way, it must have been shared
by her sons. If she had none, then her brother would be
the next heir. That she can leave it as she will must be a
matter of legal instrument. The brother must consent to
the exception to the rule.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Donation in Assyria</note>
In Assyrian times, donation is rarely represented within
the group of documents which have reached us. Here is
one case:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 619.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
The household which Bêl-nâ'id gave to his daughter, Baltêa-abate.
A house in Nineveh, before the great gate of the temple of Shamash.
(Then come the servants, a <foreign rend='italic'>šaḳu</foreign>
or head man, a washerman, a <foreign rend='italic'>šaknu</foreign>,
and others, male and female, in all eleven souls.) Dated the
fourteenth of Adar, in the Eponymy of Marduk-shar-uṣur. Nine
witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
This may be donation, or adoption, or even a marriage-portion.
</p>

<p>
At all times, a difficulty arises from the phraseology of
the deeds of gift. When we are told that <q>A has given B
such and such things,</q> we do not know the ground of the
gift. <q>To give for money,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>nadânu
ana kaspi</foreign>, is the usual expression for <q>to sell.</q>
In the older documents <foreign rend='italic'>šarâḳu</foreign>,
<q>to present,</q> often occurs, but has in most cases the derived
technical sense <q>to dower,</q> or <q>give a marriage-portion.</q>
Hence, we are not able to judge whether what appears as
<q>gift</q> may not really be <q>a sale,</q> or some payment meant
to complete the portioning off of a daughter, on marriage
or taking vows.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the Second Babylonian Empire</note>
There are, however, a large number of deeds of gift
which have reached us from the Second Babylonian Empire.
The characteristic formula may be taken to be <foreign rend='italic'>ina ḫûd
libbišu iknukma pâni ušadgil</foreign>, <q>in the joy of
his heart (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
of his own free will, implying that no consideration was
taken <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>) he has sealed and placed at the disposal
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
of.</q> As a rule, we may suspect these to be <q>gifts</q>
to which the recipient had a right. Thus, mother to son,<note place='foot'>Nbd.
65.</note> brother to sister,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 1098.</note> man to wife
and daughter,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 334.</note> mother to
daughter,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 368.</note> are not free from suspicion. But when a man
gives maintenance to wife and son,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 113.</note> brother gives
dower to sister,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 258.</note> father-in-law gives son-in-law
arrears of his daughter's dower,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 348.</note> and wherever there
is a hint that the <q>gift</q> was a <foreign rend='italic'>nudunnû</foreign>,
or a <foreign rend='italic'>šeriḳtu</foreign>, we may regard the case as not
properly <q>donation,</q> but <q>dower.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>An example</note>
The following example shows the limitations on free gift
that still remained in later times.<note place='foot'>Nbk.
109.</note> Zêrûtu had married and
had a son, Shâpik-zêri. Then he had an intrigue with
Nasikâtum, daughter of the Sealand scribe, who bore him
a son, Balâṭu. He gave Balâṭu a house, but did not adopt
him. After Zêrûtu died, Shâpik-zêri demanded the house
as his father's heir. The judges gave it to him and also the
deed of gift.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dedications</note>
The dedication of land to a temple or of a child to the
service of a god may be considered as examples of free gift;
but they are of a nature deserving separate consideration.
We have already noticed some cases of such donations by
the kings. We know from the Code that a father might
dedicate a child as a votary,<note place='foot'>§ 180 f.</note> and he might portion that
child; but this did not bring a free gift to the temple, for
the family had the reversion of the votary's property.
</p>

<p>
As a further example of dedication by a private owner,
we may take the following:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
704.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>To the chief priest of a temple</note>
<quote rend='display'>
As temple of the god Lugalla (the king) and his consort Shullat,
Nûr-ilishu, son of Bêl-nada, has dedicated to his god one
<hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of improved
land, for his life (salvation), has devoted it to his god. Pî-sha-Shamash
shall be the priest of the temple. Nûr-ilishu shall lay
no claim to the priesthood. The curse of Shamash and of Sumulâ-ilu
be on him who disputes the settlement. Seven witnesses.
</quote>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<p>
This is total alienation. The donor is not making an indirect
provision for himself, but waives all claims to be the
chief priest of the temple.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of children to Shamash</note>
Here is an example of a dedication of
children:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> 2183.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Tablet of Ishtar-ummi and Aḫatâni, daughters of Innabatum.
Innabatum, daughter of Bur-Sin, has dedicated them to Shamash.
As long as Innabatum lives, Ishtar-ummi and Aḫatâni shall support
her, and after Innabatum, their mother [is dead], no one among her
sons, their brothers, shall have any claim on them for anything
whatever. They have sworn by Shamash, Malkat, Marduk, and
Apil-Sin. Fifteen witnesses (of whom the first two are probably
the brothers, the rest females, probably all votaries of Shamash and
members of the convent.)
</quote>

<p>
In another case, a mother dedicates her son to
Shamash,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 349.</note>
with the stipulation that the son shall support her as long
as she lives.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>To secure divine favor</note>
In Assyrian times we have an example<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., 640.</note> of a dedication
of a son to Ninip, by his mother, with consent of her
brothers and their sons. A father also dedicates his son to
Ninip<note place='foot'>A. D. D., 641.</note>
for the well-being of Ashurbânipal, King of Assyria.
This is interesting as showing that the dedicator
acquired merit, which he could transfer to another. Both
tablets are defective. In another case, Aḫi-dalli, the lady
governor of one quarter of Nineveh, purchases a large
estate and presents it to some god <q>for the health of the
king.</q><note place='foot'>A. D. D., 643.</note>
Votive tablets giving the presentation of various
articles to some god are common enough at all periods.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Testaments or bequests</note>
Testamentary devolution of property was not the rule in
Assyria or Babylonia, where the law of inheritance was so
firmly fixed that it would be naturally illegal. As a rule,
children did not inherit under their fathers' will, but by
right. However, the Code allows a father to give his married
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
or vowed daughter power to leave her property as she
will,<note place='foot'>§ 178.</note>
and it is probable that he had the same power over at
least some of his property. The very frequent cases of
adoption, where the adopted child becomes heir, on condition
of supporting the parent as long as he lives, and the
cases of gift <foreign rend='italic'>retento
usufructu</foreign>, are a sort of testamentary
disposition of property.
</p>

<p>
This developed with time into something very like testament.
But we always have to bear in mind that conditions
may have been understood which are not actually
expressed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later Babylonian examples</note>
Some examples from later Babylonian times will serve to
illustrate how near these transactions came to testament.
A very interesting case is where a son, probably childless,
if not unmarried, and perhaps not in good health, gives his
father his property. The document is very involved, but
the chief points are these: A married B and they had a
daughter C, who married D. The son of C and D is the
testator. He leaves to his father D all the property which
he inherited from A and B, which they had left to their
daughter's son. It consisted of a house, fields, and slaves.
He leaves it to his father <q>forever,</q> only he is to retain
the enjoyment of it as long as he lives. He therefore
expects his father to survive him.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 277.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here is another interesting example:<note place='foot'>A. B. R., ii., 20 f.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
The division which A made with his sons B and C. The benefice
of dagger-bearer (official slaughterer) in the Ishḫara temple he assigns
to B. The benefice of the shrine of Papsukal in the temple of
Bêlit-shami-erṣiti, situated on the bank of the canal, and the sown
corn-field on the Dubanîtu canal he gave to his younger son C. All
his property out in business he assigned to his mother and his two
sisters. Certain dates in the possession of two of his debtors he
gave to his two sisters. A fugitive slave, not yet recovered, to his
mother and sisters. The house, which by a former deed he had
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
given to his mother and sisters, shall be theirs according to the former
deed. As long as his mother lives, she shall enjoy the property
formerly assigned her. The benefice of the dagger-bearership in the
temple of Ishḫara, which he had formerly assigned to his mother, she
has freely intrusted to his son B. As long as she lives, B and C
shall live in the house with her. The income of his mother his sons
shall enjoy with her. She shall give marriage-portions to his sisters,
her daughters, from her own marriage-portion.
</quote>

<p>
This is very like a last will and testament. The man
clearly expected to die shortly. He had married and had
two sons, but seems to have lost his wife. He had evidently
brought his mother and sisters to live with him. He
provides for his sons, his mother, and sisters. Evidently
his mother is the guardian of the boys. She is expected to
leave the boys all the property that was his and to dower
the sisters from her own fortune.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXII'/>
<head>XXII. Sales</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their importance</note>
Alienation of property in perpetuity was a matter for
serious consideration, where all property was as much that
of the family as of the individual. A change of ownership,
particularly in the case of land or house, also directly concerned
the neighbors. Hence the deeds of sale are imposing
documents. Whether the object sold was a piece of
land, a house, or a slave, the same general treatment was
accorded to it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The formal preliminaries</note>
There were the same formalities as in all deeds. First
the purchaser approached the vendor and there was an
interchange of ideas, often through a third party, prolonged
over a considerable space of time. When etiquette had
been satisfied and all the preliminary haggling was over, the
parties agreed upon a scribe, who was made acquainted with
the terms of the sale, already verbally agreed upon, and he
set down in the imperishable clay the legal instrument
which should bind the parties to their contract forever.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The registration of titles</note>
Undoubtedly both parties took a copy, and it seems clear
that a third was deposited in the temple archives as a sort
of registration of title. It seems probable that each party
sealed the copy held by the other, but this surmise awaits
confirmation. As a rule, the same seal seems to have been
used for all copies, and the witnesses in early times also affixed
their seals. A more exhaustive study must be made
before this can be regarded as certain. Even where duplicates
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
exist in our museums, it has been usual to publish
only one.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The method of identifying the property
transferred and the parties concerned</note>
As a rule, the scribe followed a very definite plan. First
he made clear the identity of the property. This was the
specification. In the case of land, neighbors were set down,
boundaries given, in some cases the size of the plot. In
each sale the specification is very important. The personal
identity of the parties was usually sufficiently fixed by
appending to their names those of their fathers. In many
cases, the office or rank held by a party is added. Occasionally
the name of the grandfather, or clan-father is
added. When either party was a stranger, his nationality,
or city, or tribe, is given. As a rule, the same information
is attached to the names of witnesses. These notes of personal
identity are very valuable, for they furnish means for
reconstructing long genealogies, and they throw much light
on the intercourse of varied peoples. Babylonia seems
always to have had a very mixed population.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Means of protecting the buyer from fraud</note>
Having made it impossible for any mistake to arise as to
the property sold or the parties concerned, the scribe proceeded
to guard against errors regarding the nature of the
transaction. The house or other property <q>was sold,</q> <q>the
money paid,</q> <q>in full,</q> and so on. Then he sought to
make it clear that there could be no withdrawal from the
bargain, nor after-claims raised. There was danger that the
family might put in a claim to the property. An illustration
of this is a suit brought to reclaim a house sold,
which was the claimant's reversion&mdash;an actual redemption
of ancestral property. From such perils the buyer was
protected by heavy penalties on the seller, who in fact engaged
to indemnify him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The legal verbiage</note>
These and many other complicated questions must have
long been the subject of consideration in Babylonian legal
circles. As a consequence, the scribe usually drew up the
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
deed, in set terms, with a formula consecrated by long
use, every turn of which was important.
</p>

<p>
The following is a good example of the way a scribe
drew up a deed of sale:<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 37.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A specimen deed of sale</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Tappum, son of Iarbi-ilu, <q>has bought two <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>
of field, in the Isle, next to the field of Ḥasri-kuttim, and the field of Sin-abushu,
son of Ubar-Ishtar, from Salatum, daughter of Apilia, the
<hi rend='italic'>GI-A-GI</hi> (?)
and has paid its full price in silver. The business is completed, the
contract is valid, his heart is content. In future, man with man,
neither shall take exception. By the name of Shamash, Marduk,
Sin-mubaliṭ and the city of Sippara, they swore.</q>
</quote>

<p>
Then follows a list of about twenty witnesses, the names
of whose fathers are also given. Usually the date is added.
Here, however, it is either omitted or has been lost.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The body of the document in Sumerian</note>
In this particular case the words within quotation marks
are written in Sumerian. The variations are slight as a
rule, but enough to show that the scribe understood what
he wrote and could make correct changes when needful.
The use of such a large amount of Sumerian in these deeds,
along with Semitic names and specifications, has often
been compared to the retention of Latin words in the body
of legal documents in European countries, almost to the
present day. It will be noted that this portion constitutes
the formal body of the document, and might well have been
kept ready written, blanks being left to fill in the names
and specifications. It is not, however, easy to find proof
that this was done in early times.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later deeds often in Semitic only</note>
Somewhat later, in the time of the First Dynasty, a number
of these Sumerian words and expressions are replaced
by their Semitic equivalent. Indeed, some deeds are Semitic
only. We can by comparison make a fairly complete
study of Sumerian legal terms. To some extent this was
already done by the scribes who drew up the series of
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
phrase-books called <foreign rend='italic'>ana ittišu</foreign>. But many new forms occur
in these deeds.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The specifications of the deeds
the items of permanent interest</note>
To translate all the contract-tablets would be useless, for
all the deeds of sale are exactly alike, except the names of
parties, witness, or neighbors, and the specification of the
property. The repetitions were necessary, for each deed
required an exact statement. But it is sufficient, having
once noted the style of document, to call attention to the
peculiarities of the specifications.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The earnest money</note>
<note place='margin'>Common in later Babylonian deeds</note>
Very interesting are the references to earnest money, or the
gift presented to close the bargain. As early as the time of
Manistusu<note place='foot'>D. E. P., ii., p.
1-f.</note> we find not only a price paid, but also a present
given to the seller as a good-will offering. These are of a
most varied and valuable nature.<note place='foot'>See p.
<ref target="Pg236">236</ref>.</note> As already pointed out
by Meissner,<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 96.</note>
in the purchase of a slave for four and a half
shekels, a little present of fifteen <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi>, or one-twelfth of
a shekel, was thus added. Likewise when another slave
and her baby were sold we find that in addition to the price
of eighty-four shekels, one shekel is thrown in as a present.<note place='foot'>B.
320.</note> I do not recall the occurrence of this custom in Assyrian
times, but in the later Babylonian documents it is common.
There it is often referred to as the <foreign rend='italic'>atru</foreign>,
or <q>over-plus.</q> Thus we find that in the sale of a house
in the time of Nebuchadrezzar III.,<note place='foot'>K. B., IV., p. 298
f.</note> besides the <q>full agreed price,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>šîmu
gamrûtu</foreign>, of half a mina of silver, the buyer gave one shekel
of silver, <foreign rend='italic'>kî atri</foreign>, <q>as an addition,</q>
and <q>a dress for the lady of the house.</q> The whole payment thus made of thirty-one
shekels was called the <foreign rend='italic'>šibirtu</foreign>. So in the time of
Darius (?) we find that, in addition to the full price of three
minas, five shekels of silver, the buyer adds, <foreign rend='italic'>kî atri</foreign>,
six shekels of silver and a dress for the lady of the house, making
three minas, eleven shekels of silver as the
<foreign rend='italic'>šibirtum</foreign>,<note place='foot'>B. V., p. 168.</note>
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
or simply to a price of two minas of bright silver he adds
two shekels, <foreign rend='italic'>kî pî atar</foreign>,
making a <foreign rend='italic'>šibirtu</foreign> of two minas, two
shekels of bright silver.<note place='foot'>K. A. S., p. 48.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The notary's fee</note>
Equally interesting are the sums charged as fees to the
scribe. This was paid to him expressly for obtaining the
seller's seal or nail-mark as a conclusion of the contract.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., pp. 35 ff.</note>
Thus at the end of a deed of sale of a single male slave,
executed by three owners by affixing three impressions of
the same seal, and drawn up by one scribe, we read <q>Seven
shekels of silver for their seal.</q> The price was about one
hundred and forty shekels. Thus the scribe received a fee
of five per cent. on the sale price.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 173.</note> The ratio was not constant.
It might be as low as two per cent. Thus in the
case of a sale of a slave by two owners, who made four nail-marks
in lieu of seals, we read <q>one mina of bronze for
their nail-marks.</q> There was but one scribe, and the price
was fifty minas of bronze.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No.
176.</note> Hence we cannot think that
this fee was paid for the scribe's seal, as some have done.
The seal, or nail-mark, was not <q>the authenticating subscription
by the notary,</q> but by the seller.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assyrian deeds of greater length</note>
In Assyrian times the deed of sale was a much longer
document. The same general form is observed, but the
document starts with a heading giving the information that
the seller had sealed the document, or, in the absence of a
seal, had impressed his nail-mark. No one but the seller
ever seals or impresses his nail-mark. The seller is usually
described as the <foreign rend='italic'>bêlu</foreign>,
or <q>legitimate</q> owner of the property
made over. Then first after the seal, or in a space left for
it, comes the specification of the property. Next it is stated
that the buyer has made a bargain and taken the property
for so much. But the bulk of the document is devoted to
a contract that the seller, his representatives, heirs, and assigns,
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
shall never rescind the sale, or bring any suit to recover
possession, under specified and heavy penalties. The
wording of these passages recalls most strikingly the imprecations
of the kings in their charters upon those who, in
after times, should dare to render their gifts inoperative.
This grand style is one of the many indications that for the
Assyrian period most of the deeds we have were drawn up
on behalf of the king's household.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various interests regarded as having claims
which must be distinctly met</note>
It is usually stated that the purchase is complete, the full
price paid and delivery of possession made. But in some
cases this was a mere conventional statement, and both payment
and delivery were delayed. There was to be no return
of the goods, no turning back from the bargain; the
pleading of a suit of nullity of sale is expressly barred. It
is of interest to notice who were regarded as competent, or
likely to take action to recover the property. Sons, grandsons,
brothers, brothers' sons, are all named. The enumeration
clearly included females of the same nearness of kinship.
Sisters are actually named. All these relatives are
included in the term <q>his people.</q> In some cases the
<foreign rend='italic'>šaknu</foreign>, or governor
of the district, is named, especially where
slaves are sold, or the estate involved the transfer of serfs.
The <foreign rend='italic'>šaknu</foreign> clearly had rights over lands and slaves
within his district. The transfer of property might act injuriously
to his rights. It was usual to stipulate that he had no such
rights. How they had been annulled we do not know.
Perhaps by some previous charter conferring exemption.
The <foreign rend='italic'>ḫazânu</foreign> also appears to have had the right to
intervene. The country seems to have been split up into districts
which were called on to furnish fifty units, each consisting
of an archer and a spearman or shield-bearer. Hence, the
<foreign rend='italic'>rab ḫanšâ</foreign>, or
<q>captain of fifty,</q> was really in command of
a hundred men. Whether this obligation lay on a group
of a hundred families or not, it is clear that the transfer of
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
ownership of land might lead to embarrassment of the official.
Hence, the <foreign rend='italic'>rab ḫanšâ</foreign> was likely to intervene also.
There was service on public works also concerned in the
matter. Whatever official was <foreign rend='italic'>bêl ilki</foreign>, or had right to
<q>the levy,</q> might intervene. The chief of a certain district
was called a <foreign rend='italic'>rab kiṣir</foreign>; he was also commander of a
section of the army, and he had the right to intervene.
Other officials as the <foreign rend='italic'>šâpiru</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>ḳurbu</foreign>, are named, but in all
cases the nature of the claim must have been similar. The
object of the buyer was to stipulate that the seller should
hold him exempt from such claims. How this could be
done does not appear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Occasional use of the oath of confirmation</note>
The oath to observe the contract made between the
parties still appears, but is not common. As before, these
oaths are of interest, for the light which they throw upon
local cults. The gods were invoked as being the avengers
of wrong. The decision of the king was also still regarded
as a source of vengeance, since he was bound to see right
done.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Penalties for the failure to carry out a contract</note>
The penalties most commonly invoked were payments to
the treasury of a temple. These were in the nature of forfeits.
The sum set down in the deed rarely bears any exact
relation to the value of the property, but is merely a large
amount. Usually, a sum in both silver and gold is stated,
but no relation between the relative worths of the metals
can be deduced. The forfeit might take the form of presenting
two or more white horses to the god. In a few
cases, the penalty consisted in the devotion of a child, usually
the eldest son or daughter, to a god. The verb used
for <q>devoting</q> a child literally means to <q>burn.</q> This
seems to point to an earlier sacrifice of children by fire. But
variants show that it was now used in a more general sense
of dedication. The <q>cedar wood of Ishtar</q> is named as
the spot where a daughter was to be dedicated. Further,
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
other objects might be dedicated as a forfeit. A great
bow of bronze to Ninip of Kalḫu is named.
</p>

<p>
A deterrent penalty was to return the price <q>tenfold</q> to
the seller. Once or twice the penalty is <q>twelvefold.</q> A
further penalty was to pay a talent of lead to the governor
of the city or state. Very curious is the penalty of being
required to eat a mina of some food, possibly a magical compound,
and drink an <foreign rend='italic'>agannu</foreign> pot of some drink. That this
drink was taken from a bowl inscribed with magical formulæ
seems to be the best way of reading the signs. The
penalty was, therefore, an ordeal. Then, if the contention
was right, the plaintiff would be immune; if he was merely
litigious, perhaps he would be sick or even die.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rights of the purchaser</note>
Finally, it is often laid down that, if either party (especially
the seller) shall attempt to bring a suit about the
property, the judge shall not hear him, or if he insists,
he shall lose the action. Throughout it is clear that the
buyer tries to make the seller contract to waive all rights to
recover his property, but he holds to certain rights of his
own. Thus, in the sale of slaves, a clause is frequently inserted
which claims a hundred days within which to set up
a claim to repudiate the purchase, on the ground that
the slave is afflicted with certain diseases, the
<foreign rend='italic'>ṣibtu</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>bennu</foreign>,
the character of which is not exactly known. Also
he bargains that a blemish may be at any time an excuse for
annulling the bargain. These really amount to demanding
a guarantee from the seller that the slave was free from disease
or other undisclosed weakness.<note place='foot'>For details
see A. D. D., iii., pp. 288-368.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Late tablets include the details of bargaining</note>
The later Babylonian tablets do not illustrate much that
is of great interest. They often record the initial verbal
discussion. Thus we find that when A bought of B, some
phrase like the following is recorded: A said thus to B:
<q>Give me thy property and I will give thee so much silver.</q>
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
Then we read that <q>B listened to him and gave A his property
and A gave him so much silver.</q> It is a curious little
touch of verisimilitude.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Deferred payments</note>
Sales usually were for the full price, or the agreed price,
paid down at once. This is expressly stated. But in the
later Babylonian times we have some examples of deferred
payment, which may also have been common during earlier
periods. Thus, a man sold a slave for fifty shekels and
received twenty-five shekels as advance price. The rest
was to be paid later.<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg104">104</ref>.</note> The payment was probably made
soon. Thus we find a lady selling four female slaves to a
certain man and taking a bond of him to pay four shekels,
the balance of the price, on the second of Kislev, a week
later.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 807.</note> The interval might be
two days only;<note place='foot'>Camb. 114.</note> but sometimes
a much longer period of grace was allowed&mdash;as much
as two months and seven days&mdash;although the purchase was
taken away at once.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 103.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Return of purchase on failure to pay</note>
It is occasionally stipulated that if the purchase-money is
not paid by a certain date, the object purchased shall be returned.
Thus S, having sold B some slaves, took a bond of
him that, if B did not pay in a week, he would return them.<note place='foot'>Camb.
165.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Retention of purchase without settlement</note>
A long retention of the thing purchased&mdash;especially when
it was profitable&mdash;without payment, was of course a loss to
the seller. Hence, we find the seller of a slave taking a
bond of the buyer that, if he did not pay on the date fixed,
he should return the slave and his
<foreign rend='italic'>mandattu</foreign>, or the income
which a slave paid to his master.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 103.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fraud</note>
A distinct case of fraud occurs<note place='foot'>L.
19.</note> in the sale of a slave belonging
to A by his brother B without A's knowledge. To
make the matter worse, B had the contract drawn up in
A's name. This was doubtless represented to be a case of
agency, but there is no conclusive evidence.
</p>

<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The records of sales found at an early date</note>
One of the earliest inscriptions, the stele of Manistusu,
records the purchase of large estates to form a possession
for his son Mesalim, afterwards King of Kish. The whole
inscription is splendidly published in photogravure in the
<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de la Délégation en Perse</hi>, Tome II., pp. 1-52. It
is divided into a number of sections each recording a separate
purchase. One example will suffice as characteristic of
all:<note place='foot'>Col. 8, l. 5.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
A field of seventy-three <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>, its price being two hundred and
forty-three and seven-fifteenths <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn, at the rate of
one shekel of silver a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn; price in silver,
four minas, three shekels, and
one <q>little mina,</q> the price of the field, and half a mina, six shekels
and a fraction of silver, as a present to close the bargain; one garment
for A, son of B, in presence of C, priest of Zamama (god of
Kish); one garment for D, son of E. Total, two garments present
for the field. Total, two men serfs of the field and food and money
for the sons of C, priest of Zamama.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their varied information</note>
Here are many noteworthy pieces of information. The
price of corn is fixed with relation to silver. It remained
the same down to late Babylonian times. A present was
given in addition to the price, as in many sales even to the
latest times. The serfs go with the land. Certain food and
money allowances are reserved to the priest C and his descendants.
This was probably a territorial charge. Many
other points of interest are furnished by the other sections.
Thus, among the presents given are numerous vessels of
gold, silver, and copper. The garments are of various
kinds. The men who receive presents do not appear to be
merely the sellers, but also elders of the city or district. This
indicates a tribal or district right of control over the alienation
of land. The boundaries of the estates are often given
and are of great interest for topography. A number of persons
are named as witnesses to the separate sales. In one
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
way or another some five hundred persons and about forty
places are named. Over forty titles or names of professions
are given. Among them we note many familiar in
later times, the <foreign rend='italic'>abrakku</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>nagiru</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>patêsi</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Šakkanak</foreign>, as well
as a king. We see already judges, merchants, scribes, irrigators,
boatmen, carpenters, singers, shepherds, seers, branders,
as well as slaves. We read of sheep, asses, goats, oxen.
And all this from one inscription. It is a fine example of
the kind of information this class of documents may afford.
Not least in importance is the fact that many Semitic, as
well as Sumerian, names and words occur.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Method of legally describing real estate</note>
In the case of landed property the deeds of sale usually
specify its position. In the case of fields and gardens four
neighbors are often specified. Their plots of land then
completely enclosed the plot concerned. What rights of
access to such a plot existed does not appear, but where the
boundaries were low mounds or ridges, it may be assumed
that the tops of these were common to all for access and carriage.
In towns, more usually three neighbors are named,
the fourth side is often said to be on the street. Sometimes
four neighbors are given for a house, but then an exit,
<foreign rend='italic'>mûṣû</foreign>, is specified, which doubtless means a right of
way through, or past, another house to the street. When more than four
neighbors are named, it is probably the case that on one
side the plot was conterminous, at least partly, with two of
them. Very commonly only two neighbors are given, one
each side. We may then presume that there were streets
or lanes both front and back. If we could press the term
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> to mean <q>house,</q> we might conclude from many
cases that the old Babylonian cities contained streets of houses,
which were one conterminous block of buildings. But they
seem in very many cases to have had some open ground,
and often gardens were attached.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Importance of these boundary inscriptions</note>
These boundaries are of great interest both from the
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
point of view of population and geography. Were we able
to consult all the documents which were once stored in the
archives of one great temple, we might map out a city and
assign each plot to its owner; and then extend our map
and the names of owners to the fields and plantations
which lay around the city. For outside the city walls
the <foreign rend='italic'>ugaru</foreign> or town-land extended to a considerable
distance from the city walls. We may even soon be able
to determine what was the approximate extent of this
margin about the city, a belt of land often called a
<foreign rend='italic'>ḳablu</foreign> or <q>girdle.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Many of the details puzzling</note>
Usually the plots are said to be in a city whose name is
given. Thus we conclude the close proximity of Laḫî,
Ishkun-Ishtar, Malgia, Ḥalḫalla, to Sippara. Indeed, they
were probably conterminous with it. Often the plot is
stated to be in some quarter, or ward of the city. For the
most part the names of these wards, as for example Gagim,
Karim, are difficult to understand. Why or how they obtained
these names we cannot tell. It is noteworthy that
one ward was called Amurru, <q>the Amorite land.</q> Much
has been made of this by Professors Hommel and Sayce,
but we are still far from clear ideas on the point. With
respect to other indications of locality, it must be noted
that they are usually at the end of the first line at the
right-hand top corner of the tablet, and have suffered defacement
more often than any other detail, so that they
are often illegible.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Plots often, but not invariably rectangular</note>
From many considerations it appears that most of
these plots were rectangular, but it is curious to note
that many plans of houses and fields exist which show
that this was not always the case. Perhaps it was the
irregularity of the outline which made plans necessary
and they may be an indirect witness to the rarity of such
a feature.
</p>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Plans of houses</note>
As a rule the private houses seem to have been small and
to have had a few small rooms. The palaces, or mansions
of the great, had much more extensive conveniences. One
reads of several specially defined rooms, but their names do
not as a rule tell us much of their use. Wash-houses, shops,
stables, granaries, and vacant plots, as well as gardens and
orchards, are often attached. Apparently one had to leave
the house to enter these. The houses were built of brick
and their roofs were supported by strong beams. In many
plans, while the doorways for internal communication are
carefully marked, there seems to be no access from the
street. Perhaps this is a peculiarity of the architect's ideas
of a plan, the door to the street being understood. At any
rate, doors, bolts, posts, and a lintel are frequently named.
These were often put in by the tenant and, like the beams,
taken away by him. A door might be pledged alone. But
it is possible that some houses had no door proper, being
entered by steps leading to the roof. This may be the explanation
of the oft-mentioned <foreign rend='italic'>mûṣû</foreign> or right of way out,
either between, through, or over, other house property.
When a house had other houses touching it on each of four
sides, something of the kind was necessary.
</p>

<p>
Probably the house did not usually have an upper story;
but, perhaps, as a remarkable exception, an <q>upper house</q>
is occasionally mentioned. There is reason to think that
some were in the form of a quadrangle, around an inner
court; as there are wells, or fountains, mentioned as being
<q>within the house.</q> In some parts of the city, at any rate,
the block of buildings was continuous. But there were
many streets, and canals also, in the cities. The streets,
<foreign rend='italic'>suḳê</foreign>, were as a rule only narrow lanes or passages. As
shown by the excavations at Nippur, houses stood for a long
time. When first used, the floors were above the street
level, but after the footpaths had been some time in use,
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
they rose to the level of, and finally above, the floor, so that
there were steps leading down into the house.<note place='foot'>One such plan is
published by King (L. Ḥ., ii., p. 242) and discussed by him
later (L. Ḥ., iii., p. 255 f.). There are many others in our museums, several of
which have been published (<hi rend='italic'>Receuil de Travaux</hi>, xvii., pp. 33
ff.; <hi rend='italic'>Saison de fouilles a Sippar</hi>, pp. 125, 126, 128). The
plans of the buildings excavated at Khorsabad form our most perfect specimen of an
Assyrian city and palace. Besides the original sketches and plans in Botta's
<hi rend='italic'>Nineve</hi>, excellent studies of them will be found
in Perrot and Chipiez, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Art</hi>.
There are also many plans of the early cities and palaces in De Sarzec's
<hi rend='italic'>Découvertes en Chaldée</hi>; also, <hi rend='italic'>Receuil
de Travaux</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Assyriologie</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
It seems evident that great efforts were made to provide
drains for the foundations; and perhaps other sanitary
appliances were found in the better class of houses. But
we must await more extensive exploration, not necessarily
in the more important mounds, before we are able to give
a clear account of an ancient Babylonian house.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Description of houses in the contracts of sale</note>
In the sale of a house it was often stated that the house
was in good condition.<note place='foot'>Good examples of deeds of sale
of this class of real property will be found in Dr.
Meissner's A. P., pp. 31-35. The principal terms used in such conveyances are
well discussed and for the most part correctly explained in his commentary (pp.
119-23). In all these cases we have the phrase,
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu epšu</foreign>. Dr. Meissner also regards
as <q>houses</q> the plots of land called <hi rend='italic'>Ê KI-GAL</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Ê KISLAH</hi>; they are, however, mentioned later
with some other plots of land where <hi rend='italic'>Ê</hi> denotes a
<q>plot,</q> not necessarily a <q>house.</q></note> In this respect many particulars
might be recited, or the whole summed up in one concise
phrase. In the early Babylonian documents no good example
is yet published in which all the points are mentioned.
We must refer to an example of Assyrian times,<note place='foot'>Page
<ref target="Pg244">244</ref>.</note> where all
the chief points occur together. Early Babylonian tablets
mention nearly all of these items, but only one or two at a
time. Thus we have a note that the beams and doors are
sound. Wood was scarce, and a tenant usually stipulated
to take away the beams and doors, if he put them in. The
fact that a man might pledge a door<note place='foot'>K. 1297.</note> suggests that the
modern theory of interchangeable parts was anticipated in
Babylonia, so that a door would as a rule fit any house.
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
What the beams were for is far from clear. To carry screens
or curtains of skins over a central court seems most likely.
Actual roof-beams were probably included in the <q>roof</q>
itself, which is mentioned separately from the beams. The
threshold, or perhaps, rather, the lintel of the doorway, may
be meant; and, with the door-posts, be included under
beams. The bolt or crossbar of the door is often associated
with these beams.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The streets mentioned as boundaries</note>
Streets are more frequently named as boundaries of a
house than in any other connection. The <q>great street,</q> or
<q>wide street,</q> occurs continually. Whether this was the
main street of Sippara, or only one principal thoroughfare, is
not always clear. Streets are often named after a god; thus
the street of Lugal-amgaba, of Ishtar, of Bunene, of Bêlit-nuḫshi
occur. They were named after people; Immerum the
king, or Kât-Ninsaḫ, whose house adjoined the street named
after him. The gate of Sin and his garden are named.
Canals, especially the <foreign rend='italic'>Nâr tupsarrûti</foreign>,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Nâr Bilîa</foreign>, are
named. Roads, as that to Ishkun-Ishtar, are sometimes
given.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A deed of the First Babylonian Dynasty</note>
The following is a good example of a deed of sale at the
time of the First Dynasty of Babylon,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 476.</note> translated literally
and illustrating the usual order of words:
</p>

<lg>
<l>One and two-thirds <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> of land built on,</l>
<l>next to the house of Nabi-ilishu,</l>
<l>and next to the house of Ilushu-ellatzu;</l>
<l>upper end, the house of Ḥaiabni-ilu,</l>
<l>its exit to that of Immarum,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>šar irbitim</hi></l>
<l>which is his own also;</l>
<l>from Nabi-ilishu,</l>
<l>Lamazi, the votary of Shamash,</l>
<l>daughter of Kasha-Upi,</l>
<l>by her written order</l>
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
<l>has bought,</l>
<l>its full price</l>
<l>in cash has paid.</l>
<l>In future, party with party,</l>
<l>they shall not dispute.</l>
<l>By the name of Shamash, of Marduk,</l>
<l>and of Apil-Sin they have sworn.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Then follow the names of five witnesses, but there is no
date given.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Its interesting historical information</note>
The house was in Sippara, since it is known that Nabi-ilishu
resided there.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
476.</note> The <q>exit,</q> that is to say, the front
door, opened on the road to the house of Immarum. The
scribe means to say that Ḥaiabni-ilu, who was a neighbor,
owned the house of Immarum. It appears that Immarum
was <foreign rend='italic'>šar irbitim</foreign>,
<q>king of the four quarters,</q> a title
often borne by Babylonian kings. There is a great probability
then that Immarum was no other than the Immerum,
once King of Sippara, in the reign of Sumu-lâ-ilu.
It is not necessary to suppose him still alive. This deed
was executed in the reign of Apil-Sin, whose father, Ṣâbum,
had reigned fourteen years after the death of Sumu-lâ-ilu.
Further, one of the witnesses, Sin-ublam, is said to be a son
of Immerum.
</p>

<p>
Thus we may conclude that Immarum, or Immerum&mdash;the
difference in spelling is slight for these times&mdash;King of
Sippar, bore the title of <q>king of the four quarters,</q> and as
such was still remembered in Sippara. The exact meaning
of the term has been disputed, but Sippara was a fourfold
city: Sippar the great, Sippar Amnânu of the goddess
Anunitum, Sippar Edinna, and Sippar Iḫrurum are named
in the tablets of this dynasty. Perhaps the four quarters of
Sippara are meant.
</p>

<p>
Lamazi, the buyer, daughter of Kasha-Upi, votary of
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
Shamash, bought another house in the nineteenth year of
Sinmubaliṭ,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
332.</note> borrowed a quantity of lead in the first year
of Ḥammurabi,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
1058.</note> and bought a female slave in a year of
Ḥammurabi's reign, the date of which is not yet
fixed.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 331.</note>
The name Lamazi is common and was borne by several
votaries of Shamash whom we know to be daughters of
other men than Kasha-Upi. But she may well be the same
as the lady who figures without such marks of identity in
several other documents. For example, she is named as being
a neighbor of Ilushu-ellatzu.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2192.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mention of the business agent</note>
The phrase <foreign rend='italic'>ina šapiriša</foreign>, <q>by her order,</q> occurs
often. It implies that Lamazi acted through an agent, when she
borrowed the lead, she acted through a <foreign rend='italic'>mâr šipri</foreign>,
a messenger and agent. She bought her other house in the same
way. This does not imply any disability on the part of
women to enter into business, for they were as free and
competent to act as men. Nor does it arise from her being
a votary of Shamash, for these ladies are concerned in by far
the larger part of the transactions recorded at Sippara. It
is merely the fact that on these occasions, as was frequently
done, Lamazi employed a business agent, who is not named.
Her father, Kasha-Upi, is referred to again as buying a
house from the sons of Nabi-ilushu,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2190.</note> where we learn that the
latter was a son of Shamash-ina-mâtim and brother of Kasha-Upi.
Lamazi was therefore a niece of Nabi-ilushu.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mention of the price of a house</note>
It will be noted that the price paid for the house is not
given. This is often the case. But more commonly the
price is named. As Dr. Meissner has already pointed out,
prices varied greatly. Houses in a small provincial town
like Tell Sifr naturally did not bring the same price as
those in Sippara. But variation was probably even more
due to situation and size. The lowest price per <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> was
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
four shekels, the highest thirty shekels. This gives a wide
margin.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>An Assyrian deed for sale of a house</note>
While there are many examples of the sale of houses in
Assyrian times, they do not as a rule exhibit any important
peculiarities. The best example comes from Erech<note place='foot'>K.
B., iv. p. 170 f.</note>
and may be taken as a representative specimen:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
The house of Ina-êshi-eṭir, son of Nabû-eṭir, a well-built house, furnished
with door-frames, a roofed house, the door and crossbar of
which are firm, in the quarter of Bît Kuzub-shamê-erṣiti, which is in
Erech; upper side next Sulâ, Nabû-nâṣir and Bêl-aḫê-erba, sons of
Eṭeru; lower side next Ereshu, son of Shama; upper end next
Ṣillâ, son of Nabû-aḫiddin; lower end next Ereshu, son of Nabû-bêlâni;
on each side the house of Ina-êshi-eṭir, son of Nabû-eṭir,
more or less, so much as there is, for one mina fifteen shekels of
silver, as price, he has intrusted to Ereshu. It is given, received,
paid for, freed. An exception to the sale cannot be taken, there is
no going back, neither shall implead the other. Hereafter, in future,
in days to come, neither brothers, sons, family, relations on either
side of the house of Ina-êshi-eṭir shall arise and lay claim or cause
claim to be laid on this house, shall alter or complain saying [the
usual pleas are understood here but omitted]. If so, he shall pay
twelvefold. At the sealing of this tablet were present [then follow
the names of five witnesses]. Dated in the twentieth year of Ashurbânipal.
Ina-êshi-eṭir has impressed his nail-mark in lieu of a seal.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various parts of the house</note>
This example contains a full description of a house. The
specification is rarely so full. But doors are always named,
as many as six, in one case. Most of the Assyrian deeds of
sale mention various adjuncts of the house. Thus the
<foreign rend='italic'>tar-baṣu</foreign>
or <q>court</q> is named. This was perhaps an attached
walled enclosure.
</p>

<p>
It is the name given in the Code to the fold where sheep
and oxen are kept.<note place='foot'>§ 266.</note> Vines might grow in
it,<note place='foot'>H. W. B.</note> and butter
was kept there. A <foreign rend='italic'>bît kutalli</foreign>, or out-house, is named.
Often <foreign rend='italic'>bît rimki</foreign>,
or <q>wash-house,</q> is also mentioned. This
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
was a chamber within the house, and may be rather meant
for lustration, than for ordinary washing. One house had
three of these rooms.<note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
320.</note> Sometimes there was a <foreign rend='italic'>bûru</foreign>, a
<q>well,</q> or cistern, within the house.<note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
Nos. 325-40.</note> A <q>shop,</q> or <foreign rend='italic'>bît
ḳâtâti</foreign>, was often attached.<note place='foot'>A. D.
D., Nos. 341, 342.</note> Stables, <foreign rend='italic'>bît abusate</foreign>,
are named.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 326-34.</note>
What is meant by <foreign rend='italic'>bît irši</foreign>
is difficult to determine, perhaps some chamber fitted with beds
and couches.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 326-32.</note> The
<foreign rend='italic'>bît akulli</foreign> had a well in it, but
what it was is not clear.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 340-49.</note> The
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu elîtu</foreign><note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
Nos. 329-40.</note> may be an <q>upper story.</q> If so, most houses
were one-storied only.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The burial-vault</note>
Another interior apartment is called a <foreign rend='italic'>kimaḫḫu</foreign>. This
has usually been taken to be a <q>tomb.</q> We know that the
old Babylonian kings were buried in the palace of Sargon.
But this was when the palace was no longer the abode of the
living. Ashurbânipal's charter to his faithful general and
tutor-in-arms, Nabû-shar-uṣur,<note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
No. 646.</note> seems to contemplate that
general's being buried in the palace, though this is not certain.
However, the explorations of Nippur demonstrate the existence
of vaults for burial, built over with brickwork. It
may be that such vaults did exist within the house, and
were sold with it.
</p>

<p>
A <q>portico,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>bît mutirrêti</foreign>, is named
once.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 340.</note> Beside the
<q>great house,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu dannu</foreign>,
or <foreign rend='italic'>bitannu</foreign>, a <q>second house,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>bît šanû</foreign>, is mentioned. The exit
from the house, <foreign rend='italic'>mûṣû</foreign>, a
way to the street, was often named, being very important
where the house was bounded on four sides by others.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Block houses in Nineveh</note>
Most of the houses, of which we have deeds of sale, were
situated in Nineveh itself. Occasionally, the house is shut
in by more than three others, most often only by three.
Then the fourth side is said or implied to be on the street.
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
Hence, we may be sure that in parts of Nineveh, there were
continuous blocks of houses, on each side of a street.
Sometimes, however, we have a garden, or orchard, as one
boundary.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Size not mentioned</note>
Contrary to the practice in Babylonia, the size of the
house is rarely given. We have the size of the
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu akulli</foreign>
given, in one case,<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No.
349.</note> as forty-three cubits long and twenty
cubits broad. What seem to be the dimensions of an ordinary
house were twenty-two by fourteen cubits.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 345.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The usual cost</note>
Houses in Assyria sold for from half a mina up to twelve
minas; but as long as we are so ignorant of the form, nature,
and dimensions of the house and its adjuncts, the information
is of very little interest.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Side buildings</note>
A number of other buildings or parcels of land were sold
with houses or separately. Thus, we read of a <foreign rend='italic'>papaḫu</foreign>, or
chamber, which was beneath an adjoining beer-shop.<note place='foot'>M. A. P.,
25.</note> The beer-shop is often mentioned, and was a state-regulated institution.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Unimproved land</note>
A term which was long somewhat of a puzzle, the <foreign rend='italic'>ki-gallu</foreign>,
usually written <hi rend='italic'>Ê-KI-GÀL</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>Ê-KI-DAN</hi>, is shown
definitely by the Code<note place='foot'>§ 44.</note> to be a plot of uncultivated land.
This might be rented for cultivation and was not necessarily
poor land, for it was expected to yield ten <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> per
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>. But it might also lie in a city bounded on four sides by
houses,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
377.</note> or, as often, by three houses and the street. It was
then, of course, a building site. Its price was usually about
two shekels per <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>, but might be as high as eight shekels
per <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
446.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Granaries</note>
Another common object of sale was a building called
<hi rend='italic'>Ê KISLAḤ</hi>, shown by the Code<note place='foot'>§
113.</note> to be really a <q>granary,</q>
or barn, read <foreign rend='italic'>maškanu</foreign>. These are usually in the city, and
the prices paid for them varied from one-third of a shekel<note place='foot'>S. 67.</note>
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
to fifteen shekels<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
2192.</note> per <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>. They might be surrounded
by houses on all four sides, or by a canal, road, and
street.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2518.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The term <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> means
not only <q>house,</q> but <q>field</q></note>
These examples serve to show that <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign> as often denoted
a <q>plot</q> of land as a <q>house.</q><note place='foot'>A plot of
land or house called <foreign rend='italic'>Ê burbalum</foreign> is sold
(B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 280,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 838,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2462), but
there is no information given as to its special nature; so also a
<foreign rend='italic'>bît kidim</foreign>
(B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2444a), but there is no means
of deciding what it was. A term applied to land
which may be read <foreign rend='italic'>ḳirubû</foreign>
is perhaps to be taken as <q>arable land</q> (<hi rend='italic'>M. A. P.,
p. 122</hi>). But the occurrences are not sufficient to fix the meaning clearly. It was
bounded by a house and the street.</note> In Assyrian times we find
the same usage. A fairly common object of sale is what I
take to be a <q>fuller's field,</q> or a <q>bleaching ground,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu ḳaḳḳiri pûṣê</foreign>.
It was usually in the city, of small size, given
in cubits each way, or a trifle over a homer in area. It was
near a stream. It sold for a very high price. Once we
find half of it used as a garden. It seemed to have been
fenced in. Unfortunately, no one example is perfectly preserved;
and the deeds are of no special interest beyond the
peculiar nature of the plot.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 350-58.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sales of gardens</note>
The gardens in the time of the First Dynasty of Babylon
are generally said to be planted with dates, and sold for
<q>full</q> price. Once two shekels are given for a garden of
fifteen <hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These sales less frequent in Assyrian times</note>
There are not many examples of these sales in Assyrian
times, but they give some welcome information. There is
nothing peculiar about the sale formula. The only interest
is in the specifications. The garden is usually said to be
planted with the <foreign rend='italic'>iṣu tillit</foreign>,
almost certainly <q>the vine.</q>
Hence, we may regard them as <q>vineyards.</q> The number
of plants in them is often given, being as high as two thousand
four hundred.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 362.</note>
Of other plants grown in a Babylonian
garden we can recognize with more or less certainty
in The Garden Tablet,<note place='foot'>Z. A., vi., pp.
291 ff.</note> garlic, onion, leek, kinds of lettuce,
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
dill, cardamom, saffron, coriander, hyssop, mangold, turnip,
radish, cabbage, lucerne, assafœtida, colocynth.
</p>

<p>
Other gardens are said to be <foreign rend='italic'>kirû urḳîtu</foreign>, <q>vegetable
gardens.</q> In later times the date-plantations are continually
in evidence. Beyond the specification, <q>planted with
dates,</q> and certain obscure references to the condition of
the crop at the time of sale, there is nothing to be noted.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sales of fields: in First Dynasty of Babylon</note>
The sales of fields are very numerous. They were usually
situated outside the city walls, in the <foreign rend='italic'>ugaru</foreign>,
or townland. They were not, however, reckoned outside the
<q>town.</q> For the town extended beyond its walls, like a
parish in England; and was bounded, as a rule, by adjoining
towns. In the case of Sippara, many of these <foreign rend='italic'>ugarê</foreign> are
named; but as a rule, the names do not explain themselves.
Thus, Azarim, Ḥiganim, and Shikat Malkat may be named
after persons or temples. Other names, like Shutpalu, Nagû,
Iblê, Tapirtum, may well be significant. Certainly, Ebirtim
appears to mean <q>across</q> the Euphrates. Once the field
is said to be in Sippara,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
43.</note> once in Ḥalḫalla,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
330.</note> but we cannot
press these statements to mean <q>within the walls</q> of those
cities. Usually, the boundaries of a field are four other
fields, with now and then a road, or canal. The price per
<hi rend='italic'>SAR</hi> varied from one-thirtieth of a
shekel<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
194.</note> to more than a
mina. Very frequently, indeed, the price is simply said to
be <q>full.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In Assyrian times</note>
The fields in Assyrian times are often mentioned. Nearly
always when a field, <foreign rend='italic'>eḳlu</foreign>,
is sold, it is somewhere else referred to as
<foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>, or plot, usually of so many homers in size.
There is nothing distinctive about the sale formula. The
specifications give most interesting and valuable data as to
the topography of the land around Nineveh.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., Nos. 359-413.</note> The accessories
of a field may be named. Sometimes it was corn-land,
<foreign rend='italic'>šê zêr</foreign>, part was
<foreign rend='italic'>tabrû</foreign>, <q>open land,</q> part
<foreign rend='italic'>adru</foreign>, enclosed by
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
a wall or fence. Pits or wells, canals or ditches, courts or
folds, occur frequently as adjuncts of a field.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Great estates</note>
Larger estates are built up of the simple elements which
we have noted. Sometimes the estate was so large as to
be styled a <q>city,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>alu šê</foreign>.
These <q>cities</q> are generally
called after the name of some one, probably a former owner.
But the number of people sold in them does not justify
the use of any larger designation than <q>hamlet.</q> A large
estate, with a few people on it, obviously its bailiffs and the
serfs of its landlord, constituted the <foreign rend='italic'>alu</foreign>.
Hence, this term, like <foreign rend='italic'>bîtu</foreign>,
must have a wider signification than that usually
given it. Such hamlets were, doubtless, the germs of future
cities, but the term evidently denotes simply a settled
abode of a group of people.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Plans of estates</note>
From very early times the Babylonians drew plans of
estates, which are in many ways very instructive. The
seated statue of Gudea, found by De Sarzec at Telloh, has
a plan of his city upon a tablet on his lap, accompanied by
a scale of dimensions or a standard of length.<note place='foot'>This
plan is published in <hi rend='italic'>Découvertes en Chaldée</hi>, plate 15 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
Professor Oppert, Dr. Eisenlohr, M. Thureau-Dangin, and
others have discussed at length the plan of a field,<note place='foot'>Published
best in <hi rend='italic'>Rev. Ass.</hi>, iv., p. 13 f.</note> which
has the sides of several plots given in linear measure and
the areas in square measure. From this was obtained a
great variety of results regarding the relations between the
measures.<note place='foot'><p>Much earlier plans will
be found, pp. 21 ff. They are ascribed to the age of
Sargon I. and Naram-Sin. A plan, or rather map, of Babylon was also published
by Dr. Peiser. [<hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iv., 361 ff.] This is
rather geographical than cadastral, and, perhaps, mythical, since
it refers to the king Shamash-napishtim-uṣur, who may be
the Shamash-napishtim of the flood story.
</p>
<p>
A number of other plans are given, or referred to, by Father Scheil in
<hi rend='italic'>Rec. des Trav.</hi>, xvii., 1 and 2, pp. 33 ff. A good
many more appear in <hi rend='italic'>Une Saison de fouilles a Sippar</hi>.
There are many others in the great museums and in private hands. For
conclusions regarding linear and square measures, cf. Appendix III.</p></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXIII. Loans And Deposits</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Records of loans of an early period</note>
In the first epoch there are many examples of loans.
The characteristic word <hi rend='italic'>ŠU-BA-TI</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>ŠU-BA-AN-TI</hi>, which
means <q>he has borrowed,</q> has been used as a title and they
are often called <hi rend='italic'>ŠUBATI</hi> tablets. They are the receipts
given for the loans by the borrowers. Here is an example:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Sixty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn, royal quality, from L have been received
by B.</q> Date. Seal of borrower.
</quote>

<p>
In place of corn we may have money, dates, wool, or
almost anything. Sometimes a date for repayment is given.
In the examples there are usually no references to the interest
to be paid for the loan. They may be regarded as
advances made to temple tenants, or serfs, to be repaid at
harvest from crops.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their value for chronology</note>
The greatest value of these tablets lies in their dates.
The dates are usually events. Many of these have already
been collected and registered, especially by Dr. H. Radau.<note place='foot'>E.
B. H., pp. 254 ff., etc.</note>
But there is even more to be done, when further examples
are published. Many tablets contain two dates referring
to loans contracted at different times. By this means the
sequence can gradually be determined. The seals are also
of great interest and often of value, as may be seen from
Dr. Radau's work.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Second Epoch. Repayments in kind or its stated equivalent</note>
Advances of all sorts were freely made both with and
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
without interest. For convenience we may separate money
from corn loans and advances of all kinds of commodities;
but we must not forget that corn, at any rate, was legal
tender; and silver loans might be repaid in corn. This,
however, was early recognized as an inconvenience and it is
quite common to find a direct stipulation that what was
lent shall be repaid in kind. It soon became usual to state
that if the loan was repaid otherwise, it must be according
to a fixed ratio between silver and corn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Promissory notes</note>
A very large number of loans take the form of <hi rend='italic'>Abstract
schuldscheine</hi>, loans without statement of any cause for the
debt. They are merely promises to pay, that is, acknowledgments
of indebtedness. Thus we read: <q>Five shekels
of silver which A has given to B. On such a date B shall
pay five shekels of silver to A.</q> A penalty may be added
for not paying on the fixed date. Usually this takes the
form of interest. The rate is one shekel <hi rend='italic'>per mina</hi> each
month, or twelve shekels <hi rend='italic'>per mina yearly</hi>, that is, twenty
per cent. There is no clear case of money lent as an investment
to bear interest. That was done in quite another way.
The lender entered into relationship with an agent, to whom
he furnished capital and who traded with the money and
repaid it with interest.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Temporary loans at harvest-time</note>
Most of the loans were evidently contracted to meet
temporary embarrassment. Usually it was in connection
with the need of cash to pay the expenses at harvest-time.
The loan was then repaid at harvest. It might be repaid
in corn.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
2524.</note> The time was usually short&mdash;fifteen days is
named.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 15.</note>
The lender had his reward in obtaining his money's
worth in corn, when its price was cheapest. But he was
evidently not expected to charge interest. A similar kind
of loan is half a mina of silver to pay the price of a piece of
land. Here the money was lent until the land was bought,
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
and was to be repaid with interest of three <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of
corn.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2519.</note>
So half a mina for certain land to be paid, when the land
was cultivated.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loans for the payment of taxes</note>
Another reason for borrowing was the need of money to
pay taxes, <foreign rend='italic'>ana ilkim
suddanim</foreign>.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
218.</note> In one of these cases the
stipulation is added that the borrower shall bring the receipt
of the tax-collector and then may take back his bonds.<note place='foot'><foreign
rend='italic'>Kanik mušaddinim utbalunimma kanikšu illikû</foreign>,
B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 754.</note>
Here the <q>sealed tablet</q> is in one case the receipt for the
tax, in the other the receipt which the borrower gave for
his loan. But there is no mention of his repayment. Perhaps
the lender owed the tax, half a mina, and as it was a
considerable sum, sent it by a third party, but made him
give a receipt for it. But such a receipt would differ in no
respect from the sort of bond mentioned above, and would
render the messenger liable to repay the money; so he was
to have his receipt back, on handing over the tax-collector's
receipt showing that he had paid the tax.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The temple as places of temporary loans</note>
In several cases the god is represented as lending the
money. It is obvious that such advances were made from
the temple treasury.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 8,
9.</note> It is usual from such instances to
expatiate on the temple, or the priests, as the great moneylenders.
This is a view easily misunderstood. It is quite
true that the temples were great landowners, and had steady
incomes, and possessed treasuries; but there is no evidence
that they lent on usury. It seems rather that these loans
without interest (except as a fine for undue retention
of the loan) were a kindly accommodation. We know that
under certain circumstances a man might appeal to the
temple treasury to ransom him from the enemy. He might
also borrow in case of necessity without interest. Moneylending
proper existed, but was kept in narrow bounds by
the temple itself.
</p>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Current coin</note>
In view of the many questions that arise as to the nature
of the money at this period, it should be noted that the silver
is often said to be <foreign rend='italic'>kanku;</foreign> literally <q>sealed.</q>
Whether this means that the silver bars, or ingots, were sealed while
the metal was soft enough to receive a mark which would
authenticate its weight and purity, or whether it means that
the money was enclosed in sealed sacks, is hard to say.
Against the latter may be urged that such a small sum as
one and two-thirds shekels would not be sealed
up.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 218.</note> But it
may be that <foreign rend='italic'>kanku</foreign> means <q>sealed for,</q> that is,
acknowledged by the receipt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loans of corn</note>
Even more common than money loans are the corn loans.
Here the loans were generally for a short time just before
harvest, when the repayment was expected. The period is
usually short, five days,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
771.</note> or a month.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
642.</note> Interest is sometimes
demanded, at the rate of <hi rend='italic'>one hundred ḲA per GUR</hi>, or one-third,
that is, <emph>thirty-three and a third per cent</emph>. This was
probably the rate <hi rend='italic'>per mensem, four hundred per cent. per
annum</hi>. But in one case the interest is <hi rend='italic'>one hundred ḲA per
GUR per annum</hi>,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>
655.</note> once it is expressly said to be nothing,<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 24.</note> usually it is not referred to at all. Sometimes a loan was
partly in money, partly in corn.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 1182, S. 76.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other loans of produce</note>
Other things were lent, as sesame, skins, bricks, and the
like, but these loans exhibit no peculiarity. They are merely
letting the borrower have goods on credit, to be paid for, or
returned, after a time.
</p>

<p>
We may take, as an example of this kind of transaction,
a rather more complicated case:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
869.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Record of a loan</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Two and seven-thirtieths of a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn, Shamash standard
measure, which Ilu-kasha, son of Sharru-Shamash, gave to Belshunu,
Ilushu-abushu, and Ikash-Ninsaḫ. Ilu-kasha brought the corn and
returned one <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> and one-tenth and took for himself two hundred
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
and twenty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>. Later he paid one-tenth of a
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> to Ilushu-bânî,
Ikash-Ninsaḫ, and Shumma-Shamash, and they remitted in all three
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>, the former and later debt.
</quote>

<p>
In the second case only one of the former debtors is left.
The loan was partly repaid, a fresh loan contracted, and
then partly repaid. It is not clear whether the arrears were
remitted or extracted by distraint. Nor is it clear whether
Ilukasha was debtor or creditor. As a rule such points are
clear. It is only the conciseness of the formula which here
causes the obscurity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loans or allowances in series</note>
Another fairly common type of document contains a
number of sections, each containing the record of one sum.
But it is not clear that these were loans. They may be allowances
for food or salary. Thus in B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 247 we have so
much corn for the women weavers, so much more for the
votaries, so much for other officials, from the first of one
month to the thirtieth, so much for the Sutî who was watching
the field, so much for a boatman, and so on. These are
perhaps a temple steward's accounts. Their interest lies
only in the incidental notices. We also note that here a
month had thirty days. It is interesting to find that the
celebrated Sutî nomads who later gave so much trouble,
were already in the country and were employed to watch
the fields. Was this watching done on the principle of <q>setting
a thief to catch a thief</q>? Perhaps it was necessary to
employ a Sutî as custodian, of course at a salary, if one was
to preserve the crop from the depredations of his fellow-tribesmen.
</p>

<p>
Some of these tablets expressly state the amount of corn
loaned, giving the date for repayment.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 687.</note> Hence we see what
a narrow margin divides the proper bond from the mere receipt,
or even the memorandum of the loan.
</p>

<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Formal advances of working materials</note>
A number of tablets deal with advances of wool or woollen
yarn made by temple officials to weavers and dyers to
work up. As a rule they contain a number of words connected
doubtless with the weaver's craft which are not yet
made out. The following is a fairly simple
example:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 684.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One talent of wool belonging to the palace, price ten shekels of
silver, property of Utul-Ishtar the <foreign rend='italic'>abi ṣâbê</foreign>,
which Ishme-Sin, son of
Sin-bêl-aplim, Marduk-mushallim, son of Sin-idinnam, Ilushu-ibni and
Bêlshunu, sons of Sin-eribam have borrowed. The day that the tax-collector
of the palace demands it they shall pay the money of the
palace.
</quote>

<p>
Elsewhere the time of loan may be stated, two months for
example.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
701.</note> The price is always reckoned at six minas of
wool for a shekel. It seems that the borrowers were not
obliged to repay until a certain date, or until a demand was
made for certain taxes. They then must pay in silver.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assyrian loans <foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi</foreign></note>
In the Assyrian examples of money-loans the same general
features constantly recur. The most common are loans
<foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi</foreign>, which may be taken to mean <q>for
consideration,</q> as the word <foreign rend='italic'>pûḫu</foreign> means an
<q>exchange.</q> But there is never
any statement of what the consideration was. Some have
thought, that as the bond was invariably given to the creditor
to be broken up on the repayment of the loan, the
exchange referred to was a restoration of the bond in return
for the money. But the consideration, which is a legal
presumption, may have lain in the fact that the borrowers
were tenants on the metayer system and had a right to borrow
of their landlord, free of interest, at seed-time and harvest.
On such loans interest is only demanded when the
debtor fails to repay at the fixed date.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Usual rate of interest</note>
The rate of interest charged as a penalty for non-payment
or late payment was <hi rend='italic'>twenty-five per cent. per mensem, three
hundred per cent. per annum</hi>. This interest was intended
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
to secure prompt payment, but was not unfair in view of
the increase of value obtained by investing it in corn and
then sowing that. Other rates were one-third and one-eighth,
but there is no fixed rate of interest for the loan of
money, except when it was <foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>For the use of corn</note>
The interest on corn was <hi rend='italic'>thirty ḲA per homer</hi>. Some
think the homer had sixty <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>, which would make the interest
fifty per cent. But no case has yet been found which
gives the number of <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> in a homer.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The coinage</note>
The money lent is often said to belong to a god. Ashur,
Ishtar of Arbela, or Ishtar of Nineveh, are the most common.
Sometimes it is said to be in <q>Ishtar heads,</q> which
has been taken to mean ingots stamped with a head of Ishtar.
The frequent reference to the mina of Carchemish
alongside the king's mina is eloquent as to the commercial
eminence of the old Hittite capital.
</p>

<p>
An example is the following:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 1.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Sixteen shekels of silver, from A to B, <foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi</foreign>,
he has taken. On the first day of Tammuz he shall pay the money. If not, it shall
increase by a quarter. Dated the eleventh of Nisan, in the Eponymy
of Bêl-ludâri. Three witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loans on property often mere advances of material</note>
Loans or advances were also made of various kinds of
property. Thus we have an advance of ten minas of silver,
Carchemish standard, seventy-five sheep, one cow, made by
Ashurbânipal's chief steward to four men, <foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi</foreign>. The
sheep and cow they are to return in Adar. If they do not
return the sheep, they must breed them. The interest on
the money is to be one-third. Dated the twenty-fifth of
Tebet, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 664. Thirteen witnesses. Such a loan seems to
be on the metayer system.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 115.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Property on approval</note>
Here again we have an exceptional case:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 117.</note>
</p>

<p>
L lends two dromedaries, <q>which they called double-humped,</q>
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
to three men, who shall return them on the
first of the month, or pay six minas of silver. If they
do not pay the money, interest shall accrue at the rate
of five shekels per mina. Dated the fourteenth of Tishri,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 674.
</p>

<p>
These animals were rare and evidently highly valued.
What could the three borrowers want with a pair of such
animals? Were they for exhibition in a menagerie? Perhaps
they were for breeding. We may have here a case of
goods taken on approval, for a fortnight or so, perhaps for
sale to another party.
</p>

<p>
The same lender lent to the same three men, two hundred
sheep, one hundred and fifty goats, two hundred and
thirty yearling lambs, in all five hundred and eighty small
cattle. They were to return the animals by a fixed date, or
pay. Dated the seventh of Iyyar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 673. The same
lender had lent seventy-two sheep to two other men, in Sivan,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 680. They had to return the sheep in Ab, or pay
for them at the market-rate in Nineveh. Bêl-êresh acted as
agent for the borrowers.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 118, 119.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A loan of wine</note>
Other goods, such as wine, or oil, were advanced. Here
we probably have to do with the transactions of the royal
chief steward and the king's agents. For example:<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 124.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
L intrusts five homers of wine, according to the royal measure, to
D. On the first of Nisan he shall return the wine, otherwise he shall
pay for the wine according to the market-rate in Nineveh. Dated
fifth of Adar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 674. Five witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
Again:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 127.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Of oil</note>
<quote rend='display'>
L advances six homers of pure oil, price ten <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of bronze per
homer, to D, the major-domo at Carchemish. He shall repay the oil
in Sebat; if not, it shall be doubled. Dated twenty-first of Ab,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
681. Six witnesses.
</quote>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<p>
We may deduce the interesting fact that Esarhaddon
was at Carchemish in Ab, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 681. The advance was made
for the use of the royal household there.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of corn</note>
Advances of corn were made exactly as in the earlier
times. Thus:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 128.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
L advances thirty homers of corn to D, the messenger from the
city of Maganiṣi, by the hands of E, a colonel in the army. He
shall pay the corn in Marchesvan, in the city of Maganiṣi, or pay the
full value of it in Nineveh. Dated the seventeenth of Sebat,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
665. Eight witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The peculiar shape of the tablets recording
loans of corn</note>
One peculiarity of the corn loans is that they are chiefly
recorded upon what have been called heart-shaped tablets.
These were lumps of clay through which a string passed
and came out at the upper shoulders. The string was
probably tied around the neck of a sack containing the
corn. They thus served both as labels, seals, and as bonds.
Many of them have Aramaic dockets, which have been collected
and edited by Dr. J. H. Stevenson, in his <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian
and Babylonian Contracts, with Aramaic reference-notes</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These loans made by the king</note>
Thus the above example bears the words in Aramaic,
<q><hi rend='italic'>barley, assignment, which is from Nabû-dûri.</hi></q> These Aramaic
legends, in the case of such labels, may have served as addresses.
But the general purpose is obscure. All the corn
advances seem to have been made by officials of the royal
household to inferior officers, in charge of farms or otherwise
dependent for supplies.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Often made just before harvest</note>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes at seed-time</note>
They show by their dates that the corn was usually advanced
just before harvest, when corn was dearest. Some
of them name the reapers; others give the number of them.
We conclude that these advances were made as food for the
harvesters, or as wages for their labor. Occasionally, however,
the loan was made at seed-time. Most of the loans are
<foreign rend='italic'>ana pûḫi</foreign>,<note place='foot'>P.
<ref target="Pg256">256</ref>.</note> which supports the view that the meaning of this
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
phrase is really <q>for management expenses</q> and presupposes
the metayer system.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Receipts for payment of a loan of money</note>
Closely connected with money or other loans are receipts
for payment. These are somewhat rare. The more usual
practice was to break the tablet, or promise to pay, which
was returned to the debtor. But we have two good examples,
thus:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 155.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
The four minas of silver, interest, belonging to C, which were due
from D, D has paid and given to C. One with the other, neither
shall litigate. Dated seventh of Sivan, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 683. Three
witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
Here we are not aware of the circumstances which lead
to the loan. But, in one case, we have records both of the
loan and its repayment, thus:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 134.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Of a loan of corn</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Baḫiânu advanced two homers of corn, for food, to Nabû-nûr-nammir;
and one homer each to Latubashâni-ilu and Ṣabutânu, <foreign rend='italic'>ana
pûḫi</foreign>. Dated the twenty-ninth of Elul, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 686.
</quote>

<p>
And we find also:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 135.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Ṣabutânu and Latubashâni-ilu repay each one homer. Nabû-nûr-nammir
does not repay. Dated Iyyar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 685.
</quote>

<p>
Whether or not the defaulter paid later is not known;
but we probably owe our knowledge of the repayment to
the fact that all three did not pay together. We note that
each paid exactly what he borrowed. No interest was
charged.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of a fine</note>
In one case we have a receipt for a fine, or damages, imposed
by a law-court. Thus:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 162.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Forty minas of bronze, without rebate, which the
<foreign rend='italic'>sukallu</foreign> imposed
as a fine. Paid to the <foreign rend='italic'>šakintu</foreign>.
Dated the tenth of Adar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
693. Four witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
There is no statement who owed, or paid, the fine. But the
lady governor who received the money gave this receipt for it.
</p>

<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Explicitness of the Code regarding legal responsibility</note>
The Code makes very clear the legal aspect of this transaction.
A minor or a slave could only deposit under power
of attorney.<note place='foot'>§ 7.</note> A deposit was not recoverable unless made
by a deed, or delivered in presence of witnesses and duly
acknowledged by a receipt.<note place='foot'>§ 123.</note> The receiver was liable for
all loss occurring to the goods in his possession on deposit,
even when the loss was such as involved the loss of his own
goods as well.<note place='foot'>§ 125.</note> For corn, the Code fixed a yearly fee for
warehousing of one-sixtieth the amount deposited.<note place='foot'>§ 121.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The bond destroyed on payment</note>
As we learn from the few actual cases which occur, the
receipt given for the goods was returned to the recipient on
the return of the goods and the tablet broken as cancelling
the responsibility. One form which it might take is illustrated
by the following:<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 27.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Ten shekels of silver, which according to a sealed receipt was deposited
for the share of Ṣili-Shamash, he has taken from Ṣili-Ishtar and
Amêl-ili, his brothers. His heart is contented; he will not dispute.
Oath by Ḥammurabi, the king. Seven witnesses. Fourth year of
Ḥammurabi.
</quote>

<p>
Here apparently three brothers share, but one being absent
the two hold their brother's share for him, giving a
sealed receipt for it. This the judge delivered to him and
he claimed and received his share.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Examples of deposit rare</note>
Actual examples of deposit are rare; probably because
our collections refer to temple transactions, rather than to
private family deeds. We have a deposit of
lead,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 1058.</note> from
which we learn that silver was worth twice as much as lead.
It was to be sent from Ashnunna, on demand. Here is another:<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., p. 28.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Receipts</note>
<quote rend='display'>
<q>Concerning the silver which Zikrum and Ṣabitum gave to Ṣili-Ishtar
on deposit. They have received it; their hearts are content.
They gave up their bond and it was broken.</q>
</quote>

<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>

<p>
Instead of a receipt by the recipient there is often found
a list concluding with the word <foreign rend='italic'>apkida</foreign>,
<q>I have intrusted.</q>
Then comes the date and the names of witnesses. It is not
clear, however, that these things were meant to be returned.
They may only be memoranda of allowances given out.
They chiefly occur in Scheil's <hi rend='italic'>Saison de fouilles à
Sippar</hi>.<note place='foot'>S. 62, 69, 73, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>No examples in later literature</note>
In Assyrian documents no examples of this kind of transaction
are found. Nor are any very clear examples producible
from later Babylonian times. But it must not be
overlooked that some cases, where a receipt is given for a
sum or quantity of goods, without mention of interest to
be paid, may very well be acknowledgments of a deposit;
they have usually been taken to be loans.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXIV. Pledges And Guarantees</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pledges given as security in early times</note>
Very little is known about pledges in early times,
though Meissner had argued for their existence from certain
passages of the series <foreign rend='italic'>ana ittišu</foreign>,
such as <q>on account of the interest of his money he shall cause house, field, garden,
man-servant, or maid-servant, to stand on deposit</q>; followed
later by, <q>if he bring back the money he can re-enter his
house; if he bring back the money, he can plant his garden
again; if he bring back the money, he can stand in his field;
if he bring back the money, he can take away his maid; if
he bring back the money, one shall return his slave.</q><note place='foot'>M.
A. P., p. 9, and notes 1 and 2.</note>
Consequently the creditor held the pledge in his possession
until the loan was returned, when he had to give it back.
The pledges here mentioned are antichretic, that is, such
that they produce an income or return to the holder, which
is a set-off against the interest of his money.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similarity of this custom to distraint</note>
The Code recognizes the taking of property in satisfaction
of a debt.<note place='foot'>§§ 114, 115.</note> But this is rather a process of distraint
upon the goods of the debtor, in case of non-payment, than
a case of pledge. Since it was usually expected that the
property so taken would be returned on payment of the
debt, we can hardly distinguish it from pledge. Indeed,
where a debtor gave up his wife, child, or slave to work off
a debt, we have a case of antichretic pledge for the debt
and interest.
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The practice in later periods</note>
In times subsequent to the First Babylonian Dynasty,
the pledge is common. As a rule, it is antichretic, such that
income or profit derived from the pledge is a fair equivalent
for the interest of the loan. The lender acquires the right
of enjoying the pledge. As a rule this is assigned him absolutely,
so that no account is needed to be kept of interest
on one side and profit on the other. If the profit exceeds
the interest due, the excess may be returned, or it may be
credited towards the discharge of the debt. If the interest
exceeds the profit on the pledge, then the amount by which
the loan exceeds the capitalized profit must pay interest.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Very frequent in Assyria</note>
In Assyrian times loans on security are fairly common.
Here also we have antichretic loans, where the profit on
the pledge was a set-off against the interest of the money.
The pledge is expressly stated to be <q>in lieu of interest.</q>
But it seems that the property was often expected also to
extinguish the debt. Or it was merely pledged, as a
security, which the creditor would keep in case he could
not get his money back. We may illustrate these by examples:<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 58.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A loan secured by land and seven slaves</note>
<quote rend='display'>
The lady Addati, the <foreign rend='italic'>šakintu</foreign>,
lends two minas of silver, Carchemish
standard, exact sum, to D, the deputy of the chief of the city.
In lieu of the two minas of silver, a plot of twelve homers of land
in the outskirts of Nineveh, Kurdi-Adadi, his wife and three sons,
Kandilânu and his wife, in all seven people, and twelve homers of
land, are pledged. On the day that one returns the money, the
other shall release the land and people. Dated the first of Marchesvan,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 694. Ten witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
The point about the phrase, <q>exact sum,</q> seems to be that
the advance was made without any rebate. Here the
security is worth little more than the loan. Its profits
would, however, be a good security for the interest of the
loan. No time is given for repayment, but the creditor
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
undertakes to accept repayment and release the pledge at
any time.
</p>

<p>
Again:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 66.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A loan secured by a vineyard and slaves</note>
<quote rend='display'>
The lady Indibî lends sixteen minas of silver, royal standard, to
D. In the month of Tishri, he shall pay the money in full; if not,
interest shall be two shekels per mina monthly. A vineyard in the
village of Bêl-aḫê, next to that of Ḥabašu, next to that of Si'banik,
next to that of the chief scribe; also these slaves, Dâri-Bêl,
his wife, three sons, and two daughters, along with his household,
four fat cows (?); Ḥudi-sharrûtu and his daughter; all are pledged
as security. If they die or run away, the loss shall be D's. The
day that D shall refund the money, with the interest, his slaves and
vineyard shall be released. Dated the ninth of Ab, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 688.
Six witnesses.
</quote>

<p>
Or again:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., Nos. 73, 74.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A loan secured by a field</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Five homers of land belong to D, in the city Kâr-Au. The lender
L gives D two-thirds of a mina of silver. This two-thirds of a mina
of silver L shall acquire from the field and when D thus has given L
his money back, he shall release the field. Dated the sixteenth of
Iyyar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 680.
</quote>

<p>
In the following case a maid is assigned outright for a
loan. It is doubtful whether this is a sale, or a pledge:<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 76.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>By the service of a maid</note>
<quote rend='display'>
In lieu of money, Bêlit-ittîa, the maid of the <foreign rend='italic'>šakintu</foreign>,
is assigned to the lady Sinki-Ishtar. As long as she lives, she shall serve her.
Dated the fourteenth of Iyyar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 652.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>By the borrower's service</note>
A very similar case occurs in the loan of corn and a cow
by the <foreign rend='italic'>bêl paḫâti</foreign> of the Crown Prince, to a certain
Nargî of the city of Bamatu. Nargî was to serve the lender for the
corn and cow. When his service had become equivalent to
the value of the advance, he could go free.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 152.</note>
</p>

<p>
Antichretic pledge was very common in later Babylonian
times. The most typical examples are houses. The lender
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
<note place='margin'>In later Babylonian times by the free use of a house</note>
has a house in pledge. To him it is rent-free until the loan
is repaid. Hence the common phrase <q>rent is nought,
interest is nought.</q> There was then no reckoning made
one against the other.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 655.</note> The creditor might not, however,
care to take the pledge in perpetuity against interest of a
loan, never repaid. Usually a date was fixed for repayment,
at which time the debtor was bound to take back
his pledge. Thus a house might be pledged definitely
for three years.<note place='foot'>Ev. Mer. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Relations between profits and interest</note>
A reckoning might also be made, to check off profit
against interest. Thus D pledges a field to L, but on condition
that, if in any year the crop is less than will meet
the interest due, he shall pay the difference; but if, on the
other hand, it be worth more, he shall take the balance.<note place='foot'>B.
V., p. 282 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Second mortgages barred</note>
The value of the pledge might, however, be such that it
would outweigh both loan and interest. At any rate, it
should be as valuable as the loan. Hence it could not be
used as a further pledge to another. There is often a guarantee
that the pledge given has not been already pledged,
that no other creditor has a lien upon it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The creditor's responsibility</note>
In these cases the creditor enters into possession of the
pledge and enjoyment of it. He has some responsibilities
towards it. He cannot destroy it, or waste it. As a rule,
he assumed full liability for all cases for wear and tear.
He also fed and clothed a slave pledged to him. Now and
then we find the debtor responsible for clothing the slave
pledged by him.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 408.</note> It is not essential, however, to the
idea of pledge that it should come into the possession of the
creditor, only it is hypothecated to him. This practice was
very common in later Babylonian times.<note place='foot'>Dar. 294.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pledges often anticipated and readily transferable</note>
Such pledges give an eventual possession. Something
like a reversion occurs in the pledge of a share not yet divided.<note place='foot'>Dar.
144, 235.</note>
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
Thus a sum was borrowed on the understanding
that if not returned by the proper time, a slave shall be
handed over as an antichretic pledge.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 655.</note> The man who gives
a pledge may not be in actual possession of it, but pledges
it on the understanding that he will hand it over as soon as
it becomes his. Thus B bought a slave and her two young
children for sixty-five shekels, but before they were handed
over, he pledged them for fifty-five shekels. Nine months
later he sold them for sixty shekels.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 765, 772, 832.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mortgages</note>
A common case is where the debtor pledges all he has to
the creditor, a pledge usually greatly in excess of the value
of the loan and its interest for a reasonable term, but remains
in possession himself. Hence the creditor has only a
right over the pledge, a lien upon it, but no usufruct. For
this he had the bond. This also gives only an eventual
possession.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The creditor in free use, within his needs, of
pledged property</note>
We often meet with after-pledge. The creditor, being
in possession of the pledge, might traffic in its profits. If
he held a house as pledge, he was not bound to live in it,
but could sublet it. Hence he might pledge the rent of it.
Or he could repay himself his loan by repledging the house
to another. He could also pledge the loan which was due
to him. This makes a rather complicated case.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Possible complications</note>
Thus L makes an advance <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> to D and receives a pledge
<hi rend='italic'>p</hi>. He may then pledge both <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>p</hi>. If these are given to two separate persons,
<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> to A and <hi rend='italic'>p</hi> to P, then P has a
cause for uneasiness. If D comes in and pays up <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, he has
a right to the pledge <hi rend='italic'>p</hi> which is in P's possession. But the
money he advanced is not thereby paid to him. Further,
A has a right to the money <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> just paid in by D, which is
all that is in evidence. Hence L will have succeeded in
getting two sums, and unless he can succeed in realizing his
investments of them, is called on to pay both A and P with
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
one amount. Either A or P may suffer. But if L pledges
both <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>p</hi>
to one man C, then C is quite independent of
the relations of L to D. Now D simply has to pay C and
gets his pledge back. C is sure of his money.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Method of securing the holder of a second mortgage</note>
Such a transfer of the responsibility of D from L to C was
effected by handing over to C, with the pledge, also D's
bond to L. C now holds this bond, which, with his pledge,
D wishes to get back. The following is a complicated case
illustrating these points:<note place='foot'>Nbk. 132, 142,
172.</note> D had a house and pledged it to
L, who lived in it. Two others were guarantees that D would
repay the loan. The pledge was antichretic, <q>rent nothing,
interest nothing.</q> Now L wanted money; so he pledged the
house to C. But he did not wish to vacate. So he hired it
of C, at such a rate that he would repay C's loan in about
five years. It is clear that this house was not good security
for C, since D might turn out L at any time by repaying
him. L would then owe money to C for which C had no
security at all. But L in addition pledged all his own
property, his slave, and all his goods in town and country.
Further, he not only pledged the house, but handed over
D's bond to him. C thus held the house in after-pledge,
and the advance with its security in pledge. He was
therefore amply secured, since D must pay him.
</p>

<p>
Now L died and was succeeded by his son M. L had
already paid nearly a third of his debt. M thus owed less
interest on the loan still due and was accepted by C as
tenant at a lower rent. By this means M really made a
small profit to himself. In three years M had paid off the
whole sum borrowed by his father, and due from him as heir
and executor, so he gave back his father's bond to C, also D's
bond to L. Now D paid back his loan to M. His bond to
L was destroyed. The claim of C on D was annulled, the
guarantees of D were free. A final deed of settlement was
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
drawn up, in which C acknowledged that he had no claims
on D or M, nor on D's sureties. He had to say this, because
he was not only creditor to M, but as long as he held transferred
to him the pledge of D, and the credit of L, he was a
creditor with claims on D also. Further, M declares that
he has no credit on D.<note place='foot'>Such is
an actual case traced through its phases by Kohler and Peiser.&mdash;A. B. R.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The occasion for guarantees</note>
A guarantee arises from certain persons undertaking to
fulfil a responsibility which is legally incumbent on another,
in case he fails to do so himself; or to secure that he shall
fulfil it himself. Thus, guarantees are very frequent at all
times, especially in the later Babylonian period, and are of
many different kinds.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Guarantees for debt</note>
A guarantee for debt was an additional security to the
creditor. Of course, the original debtor is the security that
the guarantor shall not lose. A good example showing all
sides is the following bond for three minas due from D to
L. G and W come in and guarantee that D will pay; if
not, they will. To protect themselves, they take as a pledge
of D some of his people. But D paid and received back
his people, so that the bond was returned to D.<note place='foot'>Dar. 319.</note> Why D
did not give his people as pledge to L direct is not clear.
G and W were probably persons of greater credit and perhaps
related to D. The guarantor was sometimes called on
to pay. Thus G guarantees for D, is called on to pay and D
repays him.<note place='foot'>Dar. 310.</note> The guarantor was legally protected
against the defaulting debtor.<note place='foot'>A. B. R., ii., p. 73.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>For appearance</note>
A guarantee for appearance may have been only to come
and pay, as when G guarantees the creditor, a temple, that
D will come on a fixed date, and pay his debt; or if not, G
will himself pay.<note place='foot'>A. B. R., p. 6.</note>
It may be a guarantee that a man will
not go away; by which may be meant escape payment, or
fail to appear for judgment. This is called a guarantee
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
<q>for the foot of</q> the person thus indorsed. The <q>foot</q> is
said to be in the <q>hand</q> of him who demands the guarantee.
It often refers to debt. G guarantees for the foot of
D, out of the hand of L. If he goes away, G will pay
thirty-five <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of dates. Here G is the mother of
D.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 147.</note>
So, probably on account of debt, G guarantees for the foot
of D, his son-in-law, from the hand of L;<note place='foot'>Nbk.
342.</note> again, G guarantees
for D to L that D will come on a certain day. G takes
the responsibility for all D owes to L, and will pay if D
does not come.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 86.</note> Or, G guarantees for D and E that they
will not leave for another place. If they do, he will pay
six minas.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 83.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>For a witness's appearance</note>
But the appearance may be needed for a different purpose.
G guarantees to bring a witness to Opis, and give
witness against L that one who was guarantee for the foot
of someone to L shall return at the right time. If the
guarantee shall prove that L was paid, he is free; if not, he
is bound to pay.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 366.</note>
</p>

<p>
D owed L a debt. L ceded this debt to M, but had to
guarantee that D will come and pay.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 119.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Joint responsibility</note>
Solidarity is in some cases a form of guarantee. Thus
two men D and E owe a debt to L. Each is taken as
guarantee for the other that they will pay.<note place='foot'>Nbd.
133.</note> This is one of
the commonest forms of guarantee. The debt could then
be recovered in its entirety from either.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against theft</note>
An example of a guarantee against theft is also found.<note place='foot'>Dar. 93.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of full value of property sold</note>
A warrant against defects in a slave is very common.
The seller warrants that if the slave prove to have certain
undisclosed defects, vices, or liabilities, which would detract
from his value to the buyer, the seller will indemnify
the buyer. This indemnification seems to be effected by a
return of the purchase-money and accepting the slave back.
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
But, in some cases, the seller returned part of the purchase-money
according to a fixed scale of allowances. In the sale
of an estate, the seller guarantees that he will indemnify
the buyer in case of any defect of title to sell, or any lien
upon the estate.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Against suits at law</note>
Very common at all times was a personal guarantee not
to dispute the compact entered into. In fact, this may
always be said to be assumed. The oaths by which parties
swore to observe the terms of the compact are a form of
this guarantee. The penalties, so prominent in Assyrian
times, are voluntary undertakings to forfeit stated sums, if
found attempting to go behind the contract.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of the value of securities</note>
As the pledge did not always leave the debtor's possession,
the creditor only had a lien upon it. Hence the giver of
the pledge had to guarantee that no creditor had a previous
lien upon it. This is also extremely common. A slave
pledged for debt might run away. His labor as the offset
against the interest was thus annulled. The borrower then
becomes liable for the interest lost to the creditor.<note place='foot'>Dar.
431, 434, Nerig. 39.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXV. Wages Of Hired Laborers</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Free labor in demand</note>
Despite the existence of slaves, who were for the most
part domestic servants, there was considerable demand for
free labor in ancient Babylonia. This is clear from the
large number of contracts relating to hire which have come
down to us. The variability of the terms agreed upon is
witness for the existence of competition. As a rule, the
man was hired for the harvest and was free directly after.
But there are many examples in which the term of service
was different&mdash;one month, half a year, or a whole year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Slaves or dependents secured from owners</note>
One might hire labor from the master of a slave, or from
the parents of a young man, not yet independent, and then
the wages were small, a shekel or two. These wages were
paid to the master or parents, not to the laborer himself.
</p>

<p>
Reapers for the harvest had half a shekel,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 327.</note> or two shekels,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 2425.</note>
each. The first may be the daily wages, the latter the
price for a specific job. It is probable that the <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn
for ten days also represents the wages for the whole period.<note place='foot'>M.
A. P., 57.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wages subject to adjustment</note>
Average wages have been estimated by Meissner<note place='foot'>A. P., 10.</note> to be
six shekels per year, according to the Code, and some actual
examples of contracts. But it was evidently a matter of
agreement, for we have rates as low as four shekels and as
high as eight. Usually the employer paid down a sum, for
example, a shekel, as earnest-money; the rest was paid by
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
a monthly or daily rate, or in a lump sum at the end of the
term of service. Occasionally the wages might be paid
down at the start, but this was rare and the amount less.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Often paid in produce</note>
Very frequently, of course, the wages were paid in corn
instead of money. Many difficulties lie in the way of finding
an equivalent of the shekel in corn. Harvest labor was
probably far dearer than any other, because of its importance,
the skill and exertion demanded, and the fact that so
many were seeking for it at once. Further, after harvest,
when the wages were paid, corn was at its lowest price.
Meissner's actual examples show that two hundred and fifty
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> might be accepted as yearly wages. We have such a
variety of rates that it is difficult to draw any clear conclusion,
but two young slaves at harvest could earn three hundred
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>, and for a whole year the wages might be over six
hundred <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>, or even as much as three <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>,
or nine hundred <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>.<note place='foot'>S. 61.</note> The Code
names ten <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> as daily wages. The
average value of a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn was a shekel, hence this
gives a yearly rate of twelve shekels. In this case we may
suppose that the laborer supported himself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The labor duly guaranteed</note>
The laborer had to be bound to perform his task. A
penalty was attached to his failure to appear at the proper
time, and guarantees were sometimes taken for his appearance.
In other cases it is stipulated that the penalty for
non-appearance shall be fixed by the king's
decision.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2455.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Duration of service fixed</note>
It was usual to name expressly the time of his commencing
and leaving off his work. These clauses are incidentally
of importance as fixing the names and sequence of the
months at this period. Thus, from the example below we
see that the month Tirinu preceded Elul.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Living usually included</note>
Of course, the employer took all responsibility for the
slave whom he hired. He fed and clothed him during his
term of service. If he suffered any injury, the employer
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
had to compensate the master. Occasionally the slave
clothed himself,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
938.</note> and then his wages were higher.
</p>

<p>
As an example we may take the following:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 1137.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Nâmir-nûrshu from Rutum, Rîsh-Shamash, son of Marduk-nâṣir,
for wages, for one year, has hired. His wages for one year, twenty-four
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of oil, he shall pay, and he shall clothe him. In Elul he
shall enter, in Tirinu he shall leave. Two witnesses. Dated in the
reign of Ḥammurabi.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assyrian contracts name both wages and time-limit of work</note>
In the Assyrian times we have certain examples of advances
of corn, or money, at harvest-time for the payment
of reapers, which have already been noticed under
loans.<note place='foot'>Page <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</note>
An advance of money and food to workmen may
perhaps be put here. But it is also a contract to do work.
It reads thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Shamash-bâni-aplu, Latubashâni, Ukîn-abîa, Aḫu ... in all
four workmen. Two talents of bronze, three homers one <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> of cooked
corn. On the tenth of the month they shall do the work. All the
repairs and the beams they shall make fast. They shall fix the balks,
and set up the roof. If the bricks are not sufficient ... the
month they do not give, they shall work and finish. Then follow
seven witnesses. Dated on the sixth of some month, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 734.
</quote>

<p>
Unfortunately, parts of the tablet are injured and so the
sense is not at all clear; but the workmen seem to have had
four days in which to do the work. The price offered was
considerable.
</p>

<p>
In later Babylonian times we do not obtain much further
information. Here is a good example:<note place='foot'>Nbn. 210.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
From the twentieth of Nisan to the tenth of Ab, Zamama-iddin,
son of Shamash-uballiṭ, son of the smith, shall be at the disposal of
Nabû-usallim, son of Limnîa, and he shall pay him as his wages ten
shekels of silver. He shall pay half the wages in Nisan and the rest
in Tammuz. Whoever breaks the contract shall pay five shekels of
silver.
</quote>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<p>
The hire is nearly thirty shekels a year, as in the next
example:<note place='foot'>Dar. 215.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Bultâ, son of Ḥabaṣiru, son of the oxherd, has put himself in the
hands of Marduk-nâṣir-apli, son of Itti-Marduk-balâṭu, son of Egibi,
for wages of half a mina of silver for one year. From the first of
Sebat shall Bultâ be at the disposal of Marduk-nâṣir-apli. Bultâ
has received one-third of a mina of silver from Marduk-nâṣir-apli.
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXVI. Lease Of Property</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Form of house-rental</note>
In case of lease, the specifications of the house are usually
the same as in a sale. But this is often not so full,
since the identity of the house is less in evidence. A very
interesting text referring to the sale or lease of a house next
to the palace, in the district of Tirḳa, a house belonging to
gods Shamash, Dagan, and Idur-mêr is published by M.
Thureau-Dangin in <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Assyriologie</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV.,
p. 85 f.</note> It belonged to
the King of Ḥana, whose seal it bears. His name was Isar-lim,
son of Idin-Kakka. The receiver was Kaki-Dagan's
son. The oath was by Shamash, Dagan, Idur-mêr and Isar-lim
the king. The names are very interesting&mdash;Igid-lim, an
official of the god Amurrû; Idin-abu, king's son; Ili-esuḫ, a
judge; Idin-Nani, son of Idin-Marduk; Sin-ukûr, son of
Amur-sha-Dagan; Iazi-Dagan; Ṭuri-Dagan; Ṣilli-Shamash.
These prove that the land of Ḥana, already known by a
votive offering of one of its kings, Tukulti-mêr, was largely
Semitic. The names are either of the Babylonian or Aramaic
type. It is, of course, not easy to date, as the style
of writing in Ḥana may have been different from that in
Babylonia at the same epoch.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rental variable</note>
Meissner estimates the average rent of a house to be one
shekel per annum. But there are noteworthy variations
which, with our available data, cannot be explained. Perhaps
the best way is to take account of the size of the
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
house, usually given in the Babylonian fashion by the area
of its ground-plan. Rents were often paid in corn, but are
so variable that a value for corn in money cannot safely be
deduced.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The usual conditions of tenancy</note>
A small part of the rent was usually paid as earnest-money
to close the bargain. In the case of short leases the
rest was paid on quitting the house, in longer leases half-yearly.
Usually the term of tenancy was carefully stated.
It was most commonly one year. The cost of repairs fell
on the tenant, according to the Code,<note place='foot'>§ Y.</note> but he was forbidden
to make any alterations until he had paid over the earnest-money.
The Code perhaps only means to forbid his
closing the door and fastening it, until the deposit was
made. The landlord, in fact, preserved the right of free
entry until then.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fields rented for a limited term</note>
The usual term of lease for fields was three years. It is
not possible as yet to explain why three years was stipulated,
but it was probably due to something more than an
accident of custom. Possibly a rotation of crops or an
alternation of crop and fallow may have been in vogue.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Usual conditions of tenancy</note>
According to the Code the tenant was bound to keep the
land in good condition. His duties included the ploughing
or trenching, sowing the seed, snaring or driving off the
birds and stray beasts, weeding, watering, and harvesting.
Gardens he had to fence. The watering-machines were of
great importance and had to be kept in order. They were
worked by oxen&mdash;often as many as eight oxen were
required to work them. A certain amount of stock was
frequently leased with the land. It is not clear that oxen
were used for the plough; they may have been kept for the
watering-machines.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Land often taken on shares</note>
The landlord was in a very real sense a partner with his
tenant, though he may be described as a <q>silent partner</q>.
</p>

<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>

<p>
In the case of the great temple landowners it seems to
have been the custom to supply a very large amount of the
tenant's necessities. Seed-corn was frequently furnished,
also corn for food for farmer and men, until the crop was
gathered. The stock and farm implements were also provided
by the landlord. This metayer system of leasing land
probably accounts for loans without interest. It is not clear
that such a system was already in vogue in early times.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Stipulations regarding improvements</note>
In hiring a field it might be stipulated that the lessee
should place a dwelling upon it,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 361.</note> <foreign rend='italic'>manaḫtu ana eḳlim išakkanu</foreign>.
Here the field was at a distance from the city,
<q>beyond the upper stream.</q> If the crop was to be properly
looked after, protected from birds, stray beasts, and
robbers the farmer must live there some part of the year.
There was no dwelling. The lessee was therefore called
on to erect a dwelling. Probably a simple edifice sufficed.
At the end of the tenancy the tenant was called on to resign
this building.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Varying rentals</note>
There were two sorts of land. That called <hi rend='italic'>AB-SIN</hi> or
<foreign rend='italic'>šeru'</foreign>, seems always to have paid six to eight
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn per <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>. The other sort,
<hi rend='italic'>KI-DAN</hi>, probably read <foreign rend='italic'>kigallu</foreign>,
and certainly meaning land, not cultivated but to be brought
into cultivation, was exceedingly variable in quality. It is
set down for a rent of from three up to eighteen <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> per
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>, but some land is rented at seventy-two
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> per
<hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi>.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
797.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Allowances for maintenance sometimes a part of the agreement</note>
On account of the hire, some deposit was usually made,
which seems to bear no direct relation to amount of rent.
But while this was in many cases money&mdash;one to three
shekels&mdash;a number of cases exhibit a list of quantities of
food and drink. What these were it is difficult to say, as the
terms are written ideographically. But joints of meat, pieces
of flesh, drinks, bread and oil, seem to be intended. The
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
custom is obscure. Possibly these are set down as weekly
or monthly rations secured on the whole rent and to be set
off against it later. That the quantities are in some sense
distributive is certain, <q>so much each,</q> but whether <q>each
person,</q> <q>each day,</q> <q>each month,</q> or <q>each year</q> is not
stated. One plausible suggestion is that the landlord, like
the votary in the Code whose brothers do not content her,
let the farm to a man who covenanted to support or maintain
him. The contention is strengthened by the fact that
the cases known to us are all female landlords, and may
actually be examples of what the Code contemplates.
Having only a life interest in the property and being
without capital, they could not afford to wait until harvest
to receive the rent, but needed a frequent allowance for
maintenance.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Life leases rare</note>
<note place='margin'>One such tablet known, but difficult to localize</note>
The lease of an estate for a term exceeding a few years
was always rare. One is found on a tablet which is one of
the most interesting of all those supposed to be of the First
Dynasty of Babylon. The script and the language recall
Assyrian types most vividly and it is full of non-Babylonian
names, which suggest Hittite, or even Armenian, origin.
Unfortunately, it is not dated. It might well have been
found at Kalaḫ, or Asshur, and belong to somewhat early
Assyrian times, perhaps before Assyrian independence of
Babylonia. Not one person named in it occurs in the other
tablets of the Bu. 91-5-9 Collection&mdash;a thing which cannot
be said of another of them. If this was really found with
them, we can only suppose that centralization was carried to
such a pitch that important legal documents, even when executed
as far away as Assyria, or Mesopotamia proper, had
to be sent in duplicate to the capital of Babylonia. Or was
it possible that the principal party came to the capital with
this document in his possession, deposited it in the temple
archives there, and died, leaving no one to reclaim it.
</p>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>
Dr. T. G. Pinches gave a transcription and translation of
the text in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, 1897,
pp. 589 ff., with many interesting and valuable comments:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Six homers of corn [land] belonging to Ishtar-KI-TIL-LA, son of
Teḫip-TIL-LA, Kibîa, son of Palîa, Urḫîa, son of Itḫip-sharru, and
Irishenni, son of Iddin-PU-SI, have taken for three homers of land, to
harvest and transport. As long as Ishtar-KI-TIL-LA lives, Kibîa,
Urḫîa, and Irishenni shall transport the crop of three homers of land
and shall deliver the same in caldrons. If Kibîa, Urḫîa, and Irishenni
do not harvest and transport and deliver the same in caldrons, and the
corn perish, they shall pay in full one mina of silver and one mina of
gold to Ishtar-KI-TIL-LA. Each is surety for the other. Before
Aḫli-Têshup, son of Taishenni; before Ukuia, son of Geshḫai; before
Shellu, son of Wantia; before Kushshu, son of Ḥuluḳḳu; before
Durar-Têshup, son of Gil-Têshup; before Aḫli-Babu, the
<foreign rend='italic'>ḫazânu</foreign>, son of Nubananu; before Zinu, son of Kiannibu,
the scribe.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The names of the witnesses seem to be North Semitic</note>
The names of the witnesses are here given in full because
of their exceptional interest. Until we are sure of his
nationality it is scarcely safe to suppose the principal's
name was really pronounced Ishtar-kitilla&mdash;the latter part of
the name may well be an ideogram. The name of his
father ending also in <hi rend='italic'>TIL-LA</hi> suggests that that group of
signs is separable. If so, the signs read Ishtar-<hi rend='italic'>KI</hi> may
perhaps be ideographic also. It is evident that Teḫip is
from the same root as Itḫip, and the form looks Semitic.
</p>

<p>
Kibîa, Palîa, Urḫîa are Semitic, but Irishenni and Taishenni
remind one of the Erisinni, of the son of U'alli, King
of the Mannai in Ashurbânipal's time. Still, neither can be
said to be non-Semitic with certainty, when we recall the
many names ending in <hi rend='italic'>enni</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>inni</hi> formed
from verbs and compare the names formed from <hi rend='italic'>erêšu</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>erêsu</hi>. Names containing
the name of the god Teshup were known long ago,
as Ḥu-Teshup, Kali-Teshup, Kili-Teshup, where the other
element of the name does not seem to be Semitic. Egyptian
records give us other compounds of the name of this
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
god, who was the sky-god among the pre-Semitic peoples
of Mesopotamia
</p>

<p>
Here we have Aḫli-Teshup, Gil-Teshup, and Durar-Teshup.
With the former, Professor Hommel compares
Aḫlib-shar. With the next compare the Mitanni name
Gilîa, also Gilûa. Aḫli-Babu is a closer parallel.
</p>

<p>
Of the other names, Shellu, Kushshu, Ḥuluḳḳu, and Zinu
seem to be Semitic; at any rate they occur frequently, or
in cognate forms, well known among the Assyrians and
Babylonians. The others are all very unfamiliar. We are
as yet so imperfectly acquainted with the onomastics of the
nations surrounding the Semites that it is hazardous to
attempt to locate these people. Supposing them to be all
of one race, they may belong to a colony settled near
Sippara, but the whole style of the language is so unlike
the Sippara documents that we can hardly suppose that to
be the case.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXVII. The Laws Of Trade</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fitting-out of traders by capitalists a very early
practice</note>
The oldest form of business in Asiatic life is
<foreign rend='italic'>commenda</foreign>:
the commendatist gives a fixed sum of money to the agent
with which he does his business. The former takes a fixed
share of the profit, say half, in addition to the original sum
invested. The agent usually secures guarantees for the
capital. This method of carrying on business is customary
in the early times. The Code regulates the relations between
principal and agent. The former is called <foreign rend='italic'>tamkaru</foreign>,
usually rendered <q>merchant,</q> and the latter is
<foreign rend='italic'>šamallû</foreign>, often
rendered <q>apprentice.</q> The merchant is, however, a trader
in many ways, and in the Code he is usually named, where
we expect lender or creditor. Hence there is little doubt
that his name is derived from <foreign rend='italic'>magâru</foreign>,
or <foreign rend='italic'>makâru</foreign>, with a
meaning <q>to traffic</q> (?). He seems to have been a monied
man, who was ready to make to cultivators advances on
their crops&mdash;a practice always liable to great abuses, which
the Code aims to check.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The agent repaid the value of the outfit with interest</note>
The merchant principal also furnished goods, among which
are mentioned corn, sesame, oil, wool, wine, and manufactured
articles. The agent did the trading, and regularly
rendered his accounts to his principal. He travelled from
place to place to find a market for his goods, or to make
purchases, which could be profitably sold at home. The
principal paid no salary, but received again his capital, or
the value of his goods, and an interest or share of the profit.
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
It is clear that the merchant also moved from place to place,
and there is evidence that many of them were foreigners.
The travelling agents with their goods formed the caravan.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legal memoranda essential as security</note>
This kind of trading was regulated by the Code.<note place='foot'>§§ 100-107.</note>
Unfortunately, the opening sections of the part dealing with the
relations of principal and agent are lost; but from what is
left we see that it insisted on exact accounts being taken,
on both sides, of the amounts of money or value of goods
thus invested. If the merchant intrusted money to his
agent, he was to take a receipt for it. If the agent received
goods, he was to enter their money value and obtain his
principal's acknowledgment of the amount of his debt. If
he suffered loss of goods from his caravan by bandits, or in
an enemy's land, he could swear to his loss, and be exempt
from repayment to his principal. But if he did not prosper
in his business, or sold at a loss, he had to make good the
capital, at least, to his principal. The Code leaves nothing
to chance. If the agent is foolish enough not to obtain a
sealed memorandum of the amounts received, or a receipt
for what he pays to his principal, it is enacted that money
not sealed for cannot be put in the accounts. Much was
clearly left to the good faith of the agent. The principal
was tolerably secure of receiving back his money and had
hope of profit. Against that he had to set possible loss by
robbery of the caravan. But he was not bound again to
employ the same agent. An agent detected defrauding his
principal had to pay threefold. But it speaks well for the
Code as protector of the weak that it made the capitalist
who defrauded the agent repay sixfold.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This business done mainly by caravans</note>
From the contemporary documents we learn that the
name for the business was <foreign rend='italic'>girru</foreign>. That this was also the
name for an <q>expedition,</q> warlike as well as peaceable,
points to its connection with the caravan trade. The sign
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
for <foreign rend='italic'>girru</foreign>, also used for
<foreign rend='italic'>ḫarrânu</foreign>, a <q>journey,</q> came in later
times to be used for all kinds of business transactions.
That the relations noted in the Code actually were carried
out in practice, many tablets show. Thus we read:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One shekel of silver, price of one hundred and eighty <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi>, and
three shekels of silver which Zuzana lent Aplâ son of Edishu, for
five <emph>years</emph>, to enter on his <foreign rend='italic'>girru</foreign>.
He shall pay one hundred and eighty <hi rend='italic'>ŠE</hi> and three
shekels of silver to take back his sealed
receipt.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 549.</note>
</quote>

<p>
Here the capital intrusted was a quantity of corn worth a
shekel, and three shekels in money. This was in order to
enter on a business journey. The agent Aplâ had to return
the capital in full, as the Code enacts, to take back his bond.
There is no agreement as to profits, which might be wanting;
that was left to be understood. As a rule, the time was
shorter, generally <q>one year.</q> The agent appears to have
often borne the name of <foreign rend='italic'>muttalliku</foreign>, <q>one who wanders
about,</q> <q>a hawker.</q> The same may be denoted by
<hi rend='italic'>AḪ-ME-ZU-AB</hi>,
a group of signs whose reading is not yet clear,
but may be a variant of the ideogram for <foreign rend='italic'>šamallû</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Speculation not unknown</note>
Business was also done, as the Code shows, as speculation
in futures. Thus<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 110.</note>
we read:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Sibbat-asê-iddina hired as <q>business</q> the produce of a field from
three men. The produce of the business was to be three and seven-fifteenths
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn, according to the standard measure of Shamash
paid in Kar-Sippar, and one shekel was to be profit.
</quote>

<p>
This was what he had to pay, and evidently, if the crop
yielded more, that was his profit; if less, he had to stand
the loss. Similarly, other crops were let on the terms that
at harvest, or at the end of the <q>business,</q> a specified amount
should be paid.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Caravan trade</note>
We learn from many hints, that caravan trade was always
active. The name of Ḥarran in Mesopotamia is supposed
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
to be derived from the numerous caravan routes that crossed
there. The Tell el Amarna tablets tell us of the complaints
made by the kings of Babylonia of the robbery of caravans
in districts nominally under the control of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These dealings frequent in later times</note>
In the more private documents of the later Babylonian
times, there is again plentiful evidence that this form of
trade was common. The money was loaned out <q>to buy
and sell.</q> It was given <foreign rend='italic'>ana ḫarrânu</foreign>,
<q>for hawking trade.</q> Then whatever profit was made upon the money, the agent
<q>will give</q> to the principal. The agent binds himself
to undertake no other agency. He gives a guarantee for
the money. The principal had no further responsibility
for the business, and would not meet any further call. It
is obvious that in a sense the principal and agent were
partners, and many transactions in later times are difficult
to distinguish from cases of partnership in the ordinary
sense.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Importance of the canals for commerce</note>
It has long been recognized that the canals controlled the
prosperity of the country, but it is only lately that their
importance as waterways has been fully realized. In the
early period we read of flour sent by ship to Nippur for
certain officials.<note place='foot'>E. A. H., 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Navigation laws for shipping of great
number and variety</note>
The Code has much to say about ships. Temples owned
them, as well as private persons. It was a crime, punishable
with death, to steal a ship.<note place='foot'>§ 8.</note> We read of fees for
building or navigating various ships.<note place='foot'>§ 234.</note> The responsibilities
and damages in collisions and wrecks are apportioned.<note place='foot'>§§ 235,
236.</note> A shipowner might hire a captain to navigate a ship for him,
or might hire the captain and ship together. The usual
freight included corn, wool, oil, and dates, but many other
things were also carried. The wages of a captain was six
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn yearly. There are frequent references to
ships in the contemporary letters.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ.,
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> They were named according
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
to their carrying capacity, which was five or more
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>. A ship of seventy-five <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>
is named. They carried wood, for King Ḥammurabi ordered seven thousand two
hundred pieces of <foreign rend='italic'>abba</foreign> wood to be brought to Babylon,
three hundred pieces in a ship. A number of boat captains
or perhaps shipping agents were ordered to proceed from
Larsa to Babylon and arrive with their ships in Adar. He
gave orders for the furnishing of the crews. We further
have a correspondence concerning the invasion of certain
fishing rights by boats from another district. In the contemporary
contracts we meet with several long lists of ships
divided into little groups, of five, six, or seven, each with its
captain named, each group under a head captain, all set
down as at anchor at the port of Shamash, or the like.<note place='foot'>S. 160.</note>
There is a case of the hire of a boat of six <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> freight by
two persons for two months.<note place='foot'>S. 244.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In Assyrian tablets</note>
In Assyria, canals served chiefly for water-supply. Except
when the Assyrian kings went outside their own lands
to Babylonia or Mesopotamia, we hardly read of ships.
Sennacherib's ships were built abroad and served abroad.
There is no hint of their ever coming up to the walls of
Nineveh. The contracts only once mention a ship<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 468.</note> in
which booty was brought from somewhere.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Boat hire a regular stipulation in Babylonia</note>
In the later Babylonian times there are many references
to the hire of boats and their crews. They appear to be a
regular conveyance of goods:<note place='foot'>Nbd. 401.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One shekel and a quarter of silver for the hire of a ship which
brought three oxen and twenty-four sheep from the king's son
[Belshazzar], for Shamash and the gods of Sippara. Further, fifty
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of dates for the rations of the two boatmen.
</quote>

<p>
Thus the receiver paid carriage and expenses. The daily
hire of a boat is now one shekel, and the wages of the crew
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
amount to half as much.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 1019.</note> A boat might be bought for
twenty shekels or half a mina.<note place='foot'>Nbd. 180.</note> The wages of the boatmen
included corn, dates, salt, and onions. The freight was
exceedingly varied as before. One boat appears to have
carried fresh meat.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 343.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The maintenance of roads</note>
There are less obvious references to roads in the literature;
but that they were in excellent condition has been
conjectured from the many evidences of postal service and
ready carriage even in early times. Convoys travelled from
Agade to Lagash as early as the time of Sargon I.<note place='foot'>K.
L. Ḥ., p. xxi.</note> Innumerable
labels are found on lumps of clay with the
name and address of the consignee. These were attached
to consignments of money and goods.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A regular tariff for land-transportation</note>
The Code contemplates consignments being sent from a
great distance, even from abroad.<note place='foot'>§ 112.</note> It regulates the charges
for a wagon, with oxen and driver,<note place='foot'>§ 271.</note> or a wagon
alone.<note place='foot'>§ 272.</note>
There are several cases in the contracts of the hire of
wagons, for varied prices per year, one-third of a
shekel<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> 564.</note> to
twelve shekels;<note place='foot'>S. 572.</note> but it is not certain that these were for
conveyance from place to place. They may have been for
agricultural purposes only. The usual means of conveyance
seems to have been by asses.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Roads in Assyria of prime importance</note>
In Assyrian times we find it part of the duty of a founder
of a city to open up the roads leading to it.<note place='foot'>K.
B., vi., p. 106.</note> The land
was intersected with roads in all directions, so that a field
often had two roads as its boundaries. The whole plain
outside Nineveh was cut up by roads, which here take the
place of the canals of Babylonia. In this period we find
horses and camels in use as beasts of burden as well as the
asses.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXVIII. Partnership And Power Of Attorney</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Partnership in business common from early times</note>
Association, or partnership, makes its appearance very
early and in a highly developed state. Some forms are
very simple, as when two or more men buy or hire a piece
of land together. There may, or may not, be any family
relationship between the partners. In some cases we learn
nothing about the terms of partnership. But where we are
able to discern them, they follow the natural course that
profits were divided, <hi rend='italic'>pro rata,</hi> according to the capital
contributed. More obscure is the question how far the personal
exertions of each partner were pledged to the benefit
of the firm. There is a suggestion that some partners were
content with furnishing capital, and obtaining a fair return
upon it, while the others were actively engaged in the business
of the firm. Prolonged study and comparison are, however,
needed before all these points can be definitely decided.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Origin of the word for partner</note>
The name for a <q>partner</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>tappû</foreign>,
and the sign <hi rend='italic'>TAP</hi>
serves as ideogram. This sign consists of the two horizontal
strokes used to denote <q>two,</q> and may have been used
to denote <q>union,</q> or partnership, and so from its name <hi rend='italic'>tap</hi>
have given rise to the name for <q>partner.</q> In the new
Babylonian times the ideogram is the sign usually read
<foreign rend='italic'>ḫarrânu</foreign>, also formed of the two horizontal strokes
crossed by two connecting strokes or bonds. There is little doubt
that in early times this was read <foreign rend='italic'>girru</foreign>, when denoting
<q>business,</q> undertaken in association. Later the dualism
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
of the partnership was marked by the addition of the dual
sign to <foreign rend='italic'>ḫarrânu</foreign>. That both
<foreign rend='italic'>ḫarrânu</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>girru</foreign> are used as
words for <q>way,</q> <q>journey,</q> <q>expedition,</q> may well point
to the prominence of the idea of trade journeys with caravans.
But partnerships were made with less ambitious
aims and confined to holding and sharing in common varied
sources of income.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The usual conditions</note>
To make a partnership, <foreign rend='italic'>tapputam
epêšu</foreign>,<note place='foot'>M. A. P., 78.</note> it seems that
each partner contributed a certain amount of capital,
<foreign rend='italic'>ummânu</foreign>.<note place='foot'>M. A. P., p. 13.</note>
Yearly accounts were rendered and the profit then
shared. This took place by a formal dissolution of partnership,
when each partner took his share. This in no way
prevented a renewal of partnership. For the satisfaction
of the partners sworn declarations as to the property held
in common and the profit made were deposed before judicial
authorities. These often take the form of a suit by one
partner against the other, but it seems that they might be
only formal suits to clear up the points at issue and secure
a legal settlement.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Always legally defined</note>
A considerable number of tablets are drawn up to embody
a settlement on dissolution of partnership. Some do
not make any reference to a law officer as arbitrator; but
all contain a careful setting-forth of each partner's share and
an oath to make no further claim. It is practically certain
that these were drawn up with the cognizance of the local
law-court.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Code silent</note>
The Code has nothing to say as to partnership, unless
its regulations on the point were embodied in the lost five
columns.
</p>

<p>
A good example of partnership documents is the
following:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 358.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Erib-Sin and Nûr-Shamash entered into partnership and came into
the temple of Shamash and made their plan. Silver, merchandise,
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
man-servant, and maid-servant, abroad or at home, altogether they
shared. Their purpose they realized. Money for money, man-servant
and maid-servant, merchandise abroad or at home, from mouth to
interest, brother with brother will not dispute. By Shamash and
Malkat, by Marduk and Ḥammurabi, they swore. Then follow
seventeen witnesses. The document is not dated.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Explanation of the terminology</note>
The word for plan, <foreign rend='italic'>ṭêmu</foreign>, means the basis of partnership,
that is, its terms. Here it was <q>share and share alike.</q>
The phrase <foreign rend='italic'>babtum</foreign>, <q>merchandise,</q> includes all the
material in which they traded, excluding the living agents. The
phrase <foreign rend='italic'>ša ḫarrânim</foreign>, literally <q>on the road,</q> may
well have denoted the merchandise not in warehouse, but in circulation.
Whether <foreign rend='italic'>ḫarrânu</foreign> actually referred to a caravan may
be doubtful. We often read of goods <foreign rend='italic'>ša suḳi</foreign>, <q>on the
street,</q> in the same sense, <q>out on the market.</q> If the
partners dealt in corn, and had a quantity lent out on interest,
that was <foreign rend='italic'>ša suḳi</foreign>. Whether a distinction between
<foreign rend='italic'>ša ḫarrânim</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>ša suḳi</foreign>
was kept up is not clear. But if they invested their capital in merchandise which they
sent to a distant market for sale, the former phrase would be
more appropriate, while if they bought wool to manufacture
into cloth or garments and to sell in the bazaars of
their own town, <foreign rend='italic'>ša suḳi</foreign> would be more suitable. The gate
of the city was a market, and money or goods <foreign rend='italic'>ša bâbi</foreign>,
<q>at the gate,</q> was as we should say <q>on the market.</q> In contrast
to these phrases, <foreign rend='italic'>ina libbi alim</foreign>, <q>in the midst of the
town,</q> answers to our <q>in stock.</q> While the term
<foreign rend='italic'>mitḫariš</foreign> literally means <q>altogether,</q> <q>without
reservation,</q> it implies exact equality of share. The
<foreign rend='italic'>amâtu</foreign> was the <q>word,</q>
literally, but, applied to business, means the agreement as
to their mutual transactions. The completion of that was
reached when they took the profits and divided them. It
might include the mutual reckoning of profit and loss. The
phrase <q>from mouth to interest</q> is very idiomatic. The
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
<q>mouth,</q> or verbal relationships, included all they said, the
terms they agreed upon. The word <q>interest</q> here replaces
the more usual <q>gold;</q> both mean the <q>profit,</q> or
the balance due to each. Usually we have the words <q>is
complete,</q> the idea being that no verbal stipulation has
been overlooked, no money or profit left out of reckoning.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evidence of long-established commercial customs</note>
As will be remarked, such pregnant forms of expression
evidently presuppose a long course of commercial activity.
They can only have arisen as abbreviations of much longer
sentences. Clear enough to the users of them, they do not
admit of literal rendering, if they are to be intelligible to
us. But they are eloquent witnesses of an advanced state
of commerce.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In Assyrian literature</note>
Traces of partnership are difficult to find in the Assyrian
tablets which have reached us. We must not confuse with
partnership the holding in common of property or lands,
which may be due to heritage. Two or more brothers may
sell their common property, for greater ease of division, but
they are not exactly partners.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In later Babylonian times such evidence common</note>
In the later Babylonian times, as is natural to expect with
the larger number of private documents, there is much evidence
regarding the many forms of association for business.
We have such simple forms as the following:<note place='foot'>Nbn. 199.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One mina which A and B have put together for common business.
All that it makes is common property.
</quote>

<p>
Or thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Two minas each, A and B, have as <foreign rend='italic'>ḫarrânu</foreign>. All that it
makes, in town and country, is in common. Rent of the house to be paid
from capital.<note place='foot'>Nbk. 88.</note>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The many varied details</note>
They had a house, as shop and warehouse, the rent of
which was a charge upon the business. Slaves might be
partners with free men, even with their masters. A partner
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
might merely furnish the capital or both might do so,
and commit it to the hands of a slave or a free man with
which to do business. The slave took his living out of such
capital, and the free man received either provisions or a
fixed payment. Thus we read:<note place='foot'>Nbn. 572.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Five minas and six hundred and thirty pots of aromatics belong
to A and B as partners. This stock is given to C, a slave, and D, another
slave, with which to do business. Whatever it makes is A and
B's in common. C and D take food and clothing from the profits
where they go.
</quote>

<p>
It is not unlikely that each slave was to look after his
own master's interests. For we read:<note place='foot'>Nbn. 653.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Six minas belong to A and B and are given to C the slave of B as
capital. A and B share what it makes. A will give another slave
D to help C.
</quote>

<p>
Even women entered into business as agents. We read:<note place='foot'>Nbn. 652.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Two-thirds of a mina belonging to A and B are given to a free
woman with which to trade.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A formal dissolution of partnership</note>
As in earlier times, the dissolution of partnership usually
involved a reference to the law-courts. Thus we have<note place='foot'>Nbk. 116.</note> a
reckoning before judges of two brothers and a third who
were in a partnership from the eighth year of Nabopolassar
to the eighteenth of Nebuchadrezzar. <q>The business is
dissolved</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>girru paṭrat</foreign>). All the former contracts
were broken and shares are assigned to each. The first two
brothers were in possession of fifty shekels which were to
be divided.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reckonings</note>
Provisional reckonings were constantly made at frequent
intervals, but did not involve dissolution of partnership, nor
need to be referred to a law-court.<note place='foot'>A. B. P., ii., 59.</note>
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
Some cases are interesting for additional items of information.
Thus we note:<note place='foot'>Dar. 280.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A manufacturing partnership</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Two partners put in each fifty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of dates. Whatever it makes
is to be in common. They take a house in Borsippa for one year at
rent of half a mina. The rent is to be paid out of profits. B holds
the house and apparently carries on the business. At the end of the
year he returns it and all the utensils to A.
</quote>

<p>
It seems likely that he carried on some kind of manufacture.
A held the south house, next door. B also paid
the tithes. A similar case where some manufacture from
dates is supposed, is thus stated:<note place='foot'>Dar. 395, 396.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
A lends one hundred <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of dates, fifty <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>
of corn, sixty large pots, to B and C two of his slaves, on a partnership. They are to
take in common whatever it makes, in town and country. The venture
is to last three years. But, in this case, they are to pay interest
two minas <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>. At the end of the three years, the two
slaves returned all.
</quote>

<p>
They were given a house for which they paid no rent.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Power of attorney recognized and frequently used</note>
Closely allied with agency is the power of attorney.
In the Code<note place='foot'>§ 7.</note> a son in his father's house could not contract,
buy or sell, or give on deposit, except by power of attorney
empowering him to act for his father. The same was true
of the slave. The contemporary documents contain many
references to business done by agents on the order of their
principals.<note place='foot'>Page <ref target="Pg243">243</ref>.</note>
The Assyrians also make frequent mention of persons acting as
<foreign rend='italic'>bêl ḳâtâti</foreign>, having the power of another's
hands, being in fact allowed to act as their attorney or agent.
The king was represented in the law-courts by his agent.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 94.</note> Sometimes the agent was called
<foreign rend='italic'>bêl paḫâti</foreign> of the king's son.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., No. 152.</note> It even seems to be the case that
<foreign rend='italic'>ḳâtâtu</foreign> acquired the sense of agency, or
business, and <foreign rend='italic'>bît ḳâtâti</foreign> came to
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
mean a <q>shop,</q> or bazaar. In many cases <q>agency</q> was
expressed by <foreign rend='italic'>ša ḳâtâ</foreign>, <q>by the hands of.</q> Aliens
had to act through such an agent.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No.
307.</note> When three men borrow a quantity of straw,
one alone sealed the receipt and bond to repay, and was said to be
<foreign rend='italic'>bêl ḳâtâti ša tibni</foreign>, <q>agent for the
straw.</q><note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 151.</note> A female slave was sued for
property said to be due from her master, in his absence. A free man, perhaps
the judge, was <foreign rend='italic'>bêl ḳâtâti</foreign> for the woman that her master
would take up the case on his return, and undertook to
satisfy the suitor, if she could not do so.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 166.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Protection of the rights of the principal</note>
In later Babylonian times the phrase survived. The
commissary acted <q>with the hand</q> of his principal. We
may take this to be the hand-sign, or seal, representing
written authority. It involved a reckoning with his master,
and naturally gave rise to a number of delicate questions.
If a man bought a house for another, having been commissioned
so to do, his principal must of course pay the
price. But was he bound to accept his agent's selection?
Could he not demur regarding the price? One of these
points at least was dealt with by the later Code. Law A
deals with the man who has concluded a purchase for
another, without having a power of attorney from him in a
sealed deed. If he has had the deed made out in his own
name, he is the possessor. Of course, he can sell again to
his principal, but he could not do so at a profit. Nor is the
principal under any obligation to accept the purchase at the
price the agent gave for it. Actual examples are far from
rare: A buys a field, crop, date-palms and all, for C and D.
This purchase was made on condition that all copies of the
transaction be destroyed. The condition was not observed,
as we still possess one of them. Later A received from C,
one of his principals, about half the price he had paid. But
it does not appear that D ever paid his share, and this is
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
why the condition was not carried out. Presumably A
and C remained owners of the field.<note place='foot'>Nbn. 132, 133; A. B. P., p.
11.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Representative action</note>
There is no limit to the varieties of agency or representative
action. At all periods we meet with a brother, usually
the eldest, acting for his other brothers. A brother acting
with the hand of his brother also occurs in the time of Evil
Merodach.<note place='foot'>Ev. Mer., 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Power of attorney over funds</note>
The power of attorney was also given to receive money
and give a receipt, under seal.<note place='foot'>Dar. 386.</note> Again: A bought some
slaves of B and paid in full. B gave receipt for the
money, but did not undertake to deliver the slaves at A's
house. A can send a messenger or agent to take the slaves,
and B agrees to deliver them to such. Whatever is born
or dies from among the slaves is credited to A.<note place='foot'>A. B. P., ii.,
34.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>XXIX. Accounts And Business Documents</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Account-books</note>
There are lists which are not formal contracts, but may
have been used as legal evidence. The stewards of the
great temples, of the palaces, and even of wealthy men in
business, kept most careful accounts. These lists have
some features peculiar to themselves and are not without
considerable interest.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Those of the first epoch mainly temple accounts</note>
The tablets which have reached our museums from Telloh,
Nippur, and elsewhere, belonging to the ages before the
First Dynasty of Babylon, are for the most part temple accounts.
They often concern the offerings made by various
persons, often officials of high standing, and some may well
have been the notes sent with the offerings. But many
were drawn up as records of the receipts for a certain day,
month, or year. Interesting as they are for the class of
offerings, for the names of offerers, or of priests, and for
the cult of particular gods, or the localities near Telloh and
Nippur, and often containing valuable hints for the history
and chronology of those times, they do not give us the
same insight into the daily life of the people that the longer
legal documents do, in later periods.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Receipts for loans</note>
An important class consists of receipts for loans. Those
drawn up at full length and witnessed, have already been
considered. But the majority may only contain a list of
articles delivered, with the name of the receiver, the lender
being the holder as a temple official, while the receiver is
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
a subordinate. These may have been as effective as the
fuller bonds, but they furnish little information, except regarding
the current prices of articles.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Accounts of repairs or expenses</note>
Some tablets are concerned with hire. The amounts paid
by the temple for repairs, fresh robes for gods and officials,
even maintenance of the workmen, are all set down with
their totals for a week, or a month.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Records of measurements</note>
An important class consists of the records of the measurements,
length, breadth, and area of fields, together with
the amounts of corn which they were expected to produce.
Were these available for a widely extended area, we might
be able to map out the district round the temple from
whose archives they come.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The conditions of service with flock and herds</note>
The temples and large landowners had great flocks and
herds. Consequently, there is much evidence concerning
the pastoral occupations of the people of Babylonia. The
Code regulates the relations of the shepherds and herdsmen
to the flock-masters.<note place='foot'>§§ 261-67.</note>
Thus an owner might hire a shepherd, <foreign rend='italic'>nâkidu</foreign>,
for his sheep or cattle, at the wages of eight
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn <hi rend='italic'>per
annum</hi>. The shepherd or herdsman took
out the flock or herd to the pasture and was responsible to
the owner for them. They were intrusted to him, and if
sheep or ox were lost through his fault, he had to restore ox
for ox and sheep for sheep. If he was hired and had received
satisfactory wages, he had no power to diminish, or
abstract from, the flock or herd for his keep or private use.
He entered into a contract with the owner, and that stipulated
for the restoration of the entire flock or herd, together
with a proper increase due to the breeding of the flock or
herd. He had to make any deficiency good, by statute.<note place='foot'>§ 264.</note>
This applied also to the stipulated profit in wool or other
produce. It seems clear that his own profit was any excess
above the stipulated return. Otherwise it is difficult to see
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
what source he had from which to make good the loss to
his master. He was forbidden to alter the agreement into
which he had entered in any particular, or to sell any of the
flock, under penalty of a tenfold restitution. He was, however,
protected from liability for loss by wild beasts or accident.
But, if the loss was due to his fault, by neglecting to
keep the fold secure, he had to make up the loss.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Herdsmen's accounts</note>
It is obvious that he gave a receipt for what was intrusted
to him and made his account on return from the
pastures. These accounts are plentiful among the temple
accounts in the earliest periods, but being written for the
most part in Sumerian, have still many obscurities for us.
As a rule, each deals with the liabilities of one man, whose
<q>account,</q> <foreign rend='italic'>nikasu</foreign>, it is said to be. At the
beginning are recounted the details of his trust, so many oxen, cows, sheep
or goats, of varied ages and qualities. Here it is very difficult
to translate. Anyone who knows the variety of names
which are given to an animal by agriculturists according to
its age, sex, and use, need not be surprised to find that the
Babylonians had many names for what we can only render
by <q>sheep.</q> As a rule, we know when the ram, ewe, or
lamb is intended. But this by no means exhausts the variety.
Anyone who glances through an Arabic lexicon must
notice how many different names the Arabs have for the
camel in its different aspects. But in our case we often
have no clew to what was meant by the signs beyond some
variety of sheep, ox, or goat. At any rate, the first section
enumerates the cattle or sheep delivered to the herdsman.
Then follows a section devoted to those <q>withdrawn,</q> taken
back by the owner, or exacted as some due from the flock.
Others are noted as taken for sacrifice, used for the wages
or support of the herdsman, or else dead or otherwise missing.
These the herdsman was allowed to subtract and then
had to return the balance. There are similar lists of asses
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
or goats. The tablets hardly lend themselves to connected
translation because of the absence of verbs. The following
is an example:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Forty-three ewes, forty-three rams, seven ewe-lambs, seven he-lambs,
three she-goats, one sucking kid, to start with. Expended in
ewes and rams, none; six ewes, seventeen rams, snatched away; no
lambs lost: no ewes, one ram, no lambs. Total: one hundred and
four to start with. Total expended: none. Total: twenty-three
snatched away. Total: one lost. Namḫâni, shepherd. Overseer:
Duggazidda. At Girsu. The year after the king devastated Kimash.
</quote>

<p>
The meaning of the words is somewhat conjectural. <q>Expended</q>
may mean used for the shepherd's own maintenance.
<q>Snatched away</q> means probably deducted for revenue
purposes, about one in five. The scribe did not write
<q>none.</q> He merely left a blank.<note place='foot'>E. A. H.,
14. For fuller details the reader should consult Radau's <hi rend='italic'>Early
Babylonian History</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lists of second epoch unavailable</note>
The similar lists for the second epoch are not yet available
for study. Only one<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
447.</note> appears to have been published,<note place='foot'>In C. T., vi., p. 24.</note>
but there are many still unpublished. It is not easy to
translate them, because, though many Semitic names occur,
there is still a tendency to use the old Sumerian, or ideographic
writings. Such a list as:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Eight oxen, twenty-three work-oxen (for watering-machines),
eleven milch cows, sixteen steers, sixteen heifers. In all seventy-four
oxen (or cattle) belonging to Marduk-uballiṭ in the hands of
Bêlshunu, fifth day,
</quote>

<p>
may serve as an example, but does not convey much information
to us. These lists are chiefly valuable for the means
of comparison they afford. A three-year-old ox was worth
half a mina of silver.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
448.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Assyrian lists indicate new varieties of animals</note>
For Assyrian times we have a few interesting examples,
just enough to show that the same customs survived. There
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
are no less than thirty-five kinds of sheep and goats, and fifteen
kinds of cattle named in the lists; also eleven kinds of
birds. Here is a specimen list of asses which gives some
prices:<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 732.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
One male working ass for one and a half minas seven shekels, one
she-ass for thirty-seven shekels, a second she-ass for one mina, a third
she-ass for one royal mina, a fourth she-ass for thirty-two shekels, in
all five and a half minas two shekels.
</quote>

<p>
There is nothing to show for whom or why the list was
drawn up, but if the total is correct, we learn that a royal
mina was worth one mina forty-six shekels of the ordinary
standard. The lists of horses are now very numerous, some
dozen varieties being distinguished. Many of these lists
give the numbers of horses of different kinds which entered
a certain city on a certain day.<note place='foot'>They are published by
Professor R. F. Harper in his <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian
Letters</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> The horses are often distinguished
as coming from certain countries, being called
Kusai, or Mesai, horses. The camels are frequently mentioned,
and we learn that one was worth a mina and a
third.<note place='foot'>H. A. B. L., p. 690.</note> Dromedaries are also
named<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 117.</note> and seem to have
been worth three minas apiece.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Memoranda regarding wool</note>
Wool accounts play an important part in documents of
the early times. They may be regarded as of two kinds.
The first are shearers' accounts returned by the shepherd of
a flock; the second are concerned with the amounts of wool
given out to weavers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The four kinds of wool</note>
Shearers' accounts enumerate four sorts or qualities of
wool. The best was called royal wool, that which was of
the highest quality. The others were second, third, and
fourth quality. Poor wool and black wool are also named.
Sometimes we are told from what part of the sheep's
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
body it was taken. Other terms applied are less easy to
recognize. This wool was received by weight.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Black wool very highly valued</note>
The weavers' accounts give a list of quantities of wool,
with the same distinctions as to quality, and the price at
which it was assessed. This was doubtless the sum to be
paid by the weaver, if the wool was not returned made up.
The values attached show very clearly the difference in
quality. Thus, while two looms of royal wool were worth
thirty minas, seven looms of second quality went for the
same value, eleven looms of third quality for a talent, and
thirty-two looms of fourth quality for one talent, one loom
of another sort for one talent, and the same amount of
black wool for the same value.<note place='foot'>E. A. H.,
50.</note> It is evident that the
black wool was highly valued. The loom, literally, <q>beam,</q>
of wool, was some measure, perhaps what would occupy
one weaver. The price was probably fixed in silver. The
price of the same quality varied from time to time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sheep-shearing</note>
In the letters of Ḥammurabi and his successors there are
frequent references to the shearing, and orders for the inspection
of flocks and herds.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., pp. xlvi.
ff.</note> The Code does not refer to
sheep-shearing, though it mentions wool. The shearing
was concluded by the New Year feast in Nisan. In the
contemporary contracts there are several wool accounts.
As a rule, one talent, or sixty minas' weight, of wool was
served out to several men who were to pay for it, to the
palace, at the rate of one shekel of silver <hi rend='italic'>per mina</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The weaving accounts</note>
In Assyrian times we have great wool and weaving
accounts. Some deal with the huge amounts of wool
received as tribute from the great cities of the empire and
then served out to bodies of weavers in various palaces
with specifications of the species of cloth or sorts of garments
which were to be returned. In the later Babylonian
times we have a large number of wool accounts recording
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
the amounts given out from the temple to various persons
to weave or make up into garments.<note place='foot'>These have been
discussed by Dr. R. Zehnpfund, B. A. S., i., pp. 492-536.
He has striven to identify the garments as far as possible; but when we recall that
over eighty such garments are named in these lists, most of which are merely
names, with no indication of their uses, it is clear that a translation is generally out
of the question. We know something of their material and often of their color, but
nothing further. It is curious that in many cases these names are the same for
Assyrian and later Babylonian times.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Memoranda regarding skins of animals</note>
Skins are also named in the accounts. They are distinguished
as the skins of certain kinds of animals. Various
amounts are credited to different persons, but whether as
giving or receiving, and in what capacity, is not clear.
Sheep and goat skins are most common, but ox and cow
hides are named.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Leather</note>
The Code does not refer to these, nor the letters of Ḥammurabi
and his successors, but we have lists of skins and
carcasses of animals.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
406, 611.</note> The purpose of the lists is not clear.
In Assyrian times there are frequent references to hides.
There was a distinct grade of official called a
<foreign rend='italic'>ṣârip taḫšê</foreign>,
<q>dyer of skins.</q> Large quantities were bought in the
markets of Kalaḫ and Ḥarrân. The price was about two
shekels of silver for a skin.<note place='foot'>A. D. D.,
No. 872.</note> The articles made of leather
are very numerous; shoes, harness, pouches, even garments,
are named. It was used for buckets, baskets, bottles,
shields, and many other things not clearly recognized.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Amounts allowed for the food of animals</note>
Fairly frequent also are accounts of the quantities of corn
expended for the keep of flocks and herds. The amounts
allowed <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi> are the chief items of interest. Sheep
were allowed from one to one and a half <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> a day, lambs
half a <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>, oxen six to eight
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>.<note place='foot'>E. A. H., 152.</note> In the Code we find
allowances for the keep of animals. There are very frequent
lists in Assyrian times of amounts of corn given to
various animals. These also occur at later times. The
amounts allowed per day are various and by no means
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
uniform. A very good example gives as the allowance of
corn for a full-grown sheep two <hi rend='italic'>ḲA per diem</hi>, for a young
sheep, one <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>, for a lamb one-half
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>.<note place='foot'>Cyr. 250; Nbd. 841.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Acknowledgment of advances</note>
Acknowledgments of advances, or loans, occur in the first
epoch. As a rule, we are not told what was the ground of
the loan. The fact that these loans were to be repaid is
not stated, and we may take the tablets to be merely receipts
for things given out to officials who had a right to them.
The substances were corn of different kinds, wine, beer,
sesame-wine, butter, flour and other food-stuffs, wool, and
other supplies. We sometimes learn prices from these
tablets. Thus a <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn cost one shekel.<note place='foot'>E.
A. H., 100.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Stewards' accounts</note>
Long lists of accounts are very common at all epochs.
They relate what sums or amounts were paid out to various
officials for certain goods or for wages, keep, and the like.
In fact, they are stewards' accounts. Unfortunately, the
way in which most collections have been formed, and even
more the way in which they have since been preserved,
renders it impossible for us to make the use of them which
has often been made of mediæval accounts. Otherwise we
could obtain from them many interesting items. They are,
however, most valuable for prices and names.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The earliest mention of iron</note>
Thus, in such lists we find mention of articles which
would otherwise remain unsuspected. The first reference
to iron is in the Ḥammurabi period,<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>2</hi> 405.</note> whence we learn that
a shekel of silver would buy eight times its weight of iron.
Sometimes we get an important contribution to chronology.
It is well known that there is no certainty as to the order
of the Eponyms after <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 648, but we know their names for
at least forty years later. Any contribution to the order of
these names would be welcomed with avidity. Thus, one
scribe writes: <q>Income from the Eponymy of Sagab to the
Eponymy of Nabû-shar-aḫêshu, for six years, which was paid
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
in as maintenance, eleven talents ... besides twenty-seven
plates of silver.</q> We cannot say whose income it
was, but the previous section dealt with the income of the
crown prince, and this may be only a <hi rend='italic'>résumé</hi> of the last.
But we now know that from Sagab to Nabû-shar-aḫêshu
was six years in all.
</p>

<p>
Thus, from the most varied and often most unpromising
sources are derived those important details which make it
possible to attain an exact and realistic conception of Babylonian
and Assyrian history and life.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Babylonian And Assyrian Letters</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Letters And Letter-Writing Among The Babylonians
And Assyrians</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>External form of the letters</note>
<note place='margin'>Their envelope</note>
The ancient Babylonians early discovered the convenience
of written communication between friends at a distance.
The origin of letter-writing is not yet clear; for,
when we first meet with letters, they are fully developed.
A piece of clay, usually shaped like a miniature pillow,
was inscribed and then enclosed in an envelope made
of a thin sheet of clay. On the envelope was written the
address. As a rule, the letter was baked hard before being
put into its envelope. Powdered clay was inserted to prevent
sticking. The envelope, after being inscribed, was also
baked hard. Of course, the letter could not be read without
breaking the envelope, which was therefore a great protection
to the interior letter. The envelope was naturally
thrown away after being broken. Hence, extremely few
envelopes have been preserved.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their dates</note>
The practice of dating letters does not seem to have been
common. We have dated letters at all epochs, but they are
few. In some cases the date may have been on the envelope.
It is more common for the writer to give the day of
the month, sometimes also the month. But the date of a
letter was probably not then of any great importance.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Another method of insuring privacy</note>
Some letters seem to have been covered with coarse cloth,
on which was impressed a lump of clay, to act as a seal and
bind down the edges. The lumps were then sealed with a
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
signet-ring, or cylinder-seal. The clay envelopes were also
sealed, before baking, with the sender's seal. So usual was
this habit, that the word for seal, <foreign rend='italic'>unḳu</foreign>,
is often used to denote a sealed letter. Thus when an official acknowledges
the receipt of the king's <q>seal,</q> it means a sealed order or
rescript.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Style of the opening address</note>
The early Babylonian letters usually open with the formula,
<q>To A say: Thus saith B.</q> The formula probably goes
back to the times when the message was verbally delivered.
These would be the words used to a messenger who had to
remember the message. The verb <q>saith</q> is not expressed
exactly. The word used is <foreign rend='italic'>umma</foreign>, which is often rendered
<q>saying</q>; it introduces a direct quotation. We might render,
<q>In the name of B.</q> But the written letter replaced
the spoken message. Some think the letter was read by a
professional reader. Such readers are common still, where
education is not widely diffused. It is very clear that the
letter was generally written by a scribe. Thus, all Ḥammurabi's
letters show the same hand, while those of Abêshu
or Ammi-ditana are quite different. In the case of private
letters we have less proof. But it is possible that the king
sometimes wrote with his own hand. Some terms of expression
render that very likely. It is, however, quite impossible
to be certain on such points.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Variations of the formula</note>
The same opening formula also appears in the Tell el
Amarna letters. It is not known in Assyrian letters, but
survived in Babylonia to a late period. In Assyria the formula
is nearly the same; with the omission of the <foreign rend='italic'>ḳibi</foreign>, or
<q>say,</q> it reads <q>To A thus B.</q> In addresses to superiors,
B usually adds <q>thy servant.</q> Polite letters generally add
good wishes for the recipient. These are exceedingly varied.
The word <foreign rend='italic'>šulmu</foreign> plays a great part in them. Literally
it denotes <q>peace.</q> <q>Peace be to thee</q> is very common.
But it soon came to mean the <q>greeting of peace.</q>
</p>

<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>

<p>
Thus <q>I have sent <foreign rend='italic'>ana šulmika</foreign></q> means <q>I have
sent to wish thee peace,</q> <q>to greet thee.</q> But it also takes the
more general meaning of well-being. Thus <foreign rend='italic'>šulmu iâši</foreign>
means <q>I am well,</q> <q>it is peace with me</q>; not only absence
from war, but health and all prosperity was included.
Hence Joram's inquiry of Jehu, <q>Is it peace, Jehu?</q> means
<q>Is everything all right?</q> <q>Be thou at peace</q> may be
rendered loosely, <q>I hope you are well,</q> in the fullest sense
that <q>all is well with you.</q> No consistent rendering can
be given for such phrases as these.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>References to a former correspondence</note>
Very often letters quote the previous message of the present
recipient, <foreign rend='italic'>ša tašpuranni</foreign>, <q>what thou didst send me.</q>
But the quotation is often omitted and then this becomes
an awkward rendering. We have to fill up some general
sentence such as, <q>as to what you sent about.</q> A very difficult
sort of construction arises when the writer sets down a
list of questions, which he has been asked, and the answer
to each. As there are no capitals, periods, or question-marks,
there is often some difficulty in separating a question
from its answer. This may be done differently by different
translators, with startlingly different results.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Elliptical phrases</note>
Very many sentences are elliptical. Thus, it was common
to add at the end of the letter something like, <q>I leave it to
you to decide.</q> This might be put, <q>As the king, my lord,
sees fit, let him do.</q> But a scribe would often merely
say, <q>As the king sees fit.</q> Such elliptical sentences are
often very difficult to complete. They were obviously
clear to the recipient. To us they leave a wide margin
for conjecture.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inscribed seals on packages</note>
Very early indeed in the history of Babylonia a sort of
postal system had been developed. At any rate, in the time
of Sargon I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 3800, an active exchange of commodities
existed between Agade and Shirpurla. Packages or vessels
of produce or goods were forwarded and with them small
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
blocks of clay, impressed with seals and inscribed with the
address of the recipient. These were probably used to prevent
the fastenings of the packages from being untied, and
on their backs may be seen the impressions of the strings
which fastened the packages.<note place='foot'>Heuzey, <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Assyriologie</hi>, iv., pp. 1 ff.</note> As it happens, no letters have
yet been published from the era preceding the First Dynasty
of Babylon; but we can hardly doubt that such exist.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters of the First Dynasty of Babylon</note>
In the time of the First Dynasty of Babylon letters
appear frequently in the collections of tablets brought
to our museums. The volumes of <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts from
Babylonian Tablets, etc., in the British Museum, published
by order of the Trustees</hi>,<note place='foot'>Vol. II., 1897; Vol. IV., 1898;
Vol. VI., 1898; Vol. VIII., 1899.</note> contain a large number
of letters from copies made by Mr. T. G. Pinches. These
have been made the subject of a study by Dr. Mary
Williams Montgomery.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Briefe aus der Zeit
des Babylonischen Königs Ḥammurabi</hi>, Leipzig, 1901.</note>
Mr. L. W. King, in his work,
<hi rend='italic'>The Letters and Inscriptions of Ḥammurabi</hi>, published
fifty-five letters of Ḥammurabi to his subordinate officer,
Sin-idinnam, six letters of Samsuiluna, thirteen of
Abêshu', two of Ammiditana, five of Ammizaduga, and
two private letters. These were all transcribed, translated,
annotated, and, with a number of other contemporary
inscriptions, issued with admirable introductions,
glossary, and index.<note place='foot'>Three volumes, 1898-1900,
Luzac, London.</note> Nowhere can a more vivid picture
be obtained of the great empire and the manifold duties of
a Babylonian king. A number of the texts published in
the first volume were translated and commented upon by
Dr. G. Nagel under the title, <hi rend='italic'>Die Briefe Ḥammurabi's an
Sin-idinnam</hi>.<note place='foot'>B. A. S.,
iv., p. 434-500.</note> Professor Delitzsch added some valuable
notes. Dr. B. Meissner had already published the text of
four letters as <hi rend='italic'>Altbabylonische Briefe</hi>.<note place='foot'>B.
A. S., ii., pp. 557-64, 573-79.</note> Professor V. Scheil
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
gave the text of two letters of this period, found by him at
Sippara, in the <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux</hi><note place='foot'>XVI.,
p. 189.</note> and noticed others, and some more in his <hi rend='italic'>Une
Saison de fouilles a Sippar</hi>.<note place='foot'>Pages 105, 106, 107,
116, 123, 124, 125, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137.</note> These
are preserved at Constantinople, but the text has not yet
been published. They are chiefly private letters and of a
business nature. There are a great many other letters in
American and European museums, the publication of which
should not be longer delayed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of the subsequent period</note>
For the long period before the Tell el Amarna times, <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1500, nothing of any extent seems to have been published,
though letters are also known to exist of this period. A late
copy of one such letter, addressed by Adadi-Shumnâṣir, King
of Babylon, to Ashur-narara and Nabû-dâni, kings of Assyria,
about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1250, is partly preserved in the British
Museum.<note place='foot'>Published III. R. 4. No. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Tell el Amarna letters</note>
The Tell el Amarna tablets, some three hundred in number,
were discovered in 1887-88, at the ruins of the palace
of Amenophis IV., in Egypt. They will form the subject
of a separate volume of this series. They consist of the
letters or despatches sent to kings of Egypt by the kings of
Babylon, Assyria, Mitanni, and the subject-rulers of many
Syrian and Palestinian cities and states. From these can
be obtained a very clear view of the state of Syria and Palestine
just before the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt.
Naturally, these letters have formed the subject of a very
large literature. The most complete edition of the texts is
by Winckler, <hi rend='italic'>Der Thontafelfund von el
Amarna</hi>.<note place='foot'>Heft I. of <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen aus
den Orientalischen Sammlungen der Königliche
Museen zu Berlin</hi>, Speman, Berlin.</note> With
these should be compared Dr. J. A. Knudtzon's <hi rend='italic'>Ergebnisse
einer Collation der El Amarna Tafeln</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Weitere Studien
zu den El Amarna Tafeln</hi>.<note place='foot'>B. A. S., iv., pp. 101-54,
279-337, and 410-17.</note> A full transcription with translation
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
and glossary to these texts has been given by Winckler,
as <hi rend='italic'>Die Thontafeln von Tell el Amarna</hi>.<note place='foot'>Vol.
V. of Schrader's <hi rend='italic'>Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek</hi>,
Reuther and Reichard, Berlin, 1896.</note> An excellent
English translation by J. P. Metcalf is to be had. There
are a few of these tablets, which found their way into private
hands, or to other museums than London, Berlin, and
Gizeh, whence Winckler's copies were obtained. It is a duty
to science that these should now be published. In the <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de l'Institut Français d'Archéologie orientale</hi>, t. II.,
published at Cairo, Professor Scheil gives the text of two
more of these important letters. The explorer, Dr. F. Bliss,
found another in the ruins of Lachish. It is included in
Winckler's work above. Professor Sellin has lately found
several tablets, which by their script and personal references
are shown to belong to this period. They were found
at Ta'annek, and are published by Dr. Hronzy in the
<hi rend='italic'>Anzeige der philos. hist. Klasse der Wiener
Akademie</hi>.<note place='foot'>June 17, 1903.</note>
The interest of these additions lies in the fact that they
were found in Palestine itself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cappadocian letters</note>
The numerous Cappadocian tablets are now generally
recognized by their language and script to belong to this
period. They also show considerable affinity with the documents
of the First Dynasty of Babylon, and the Tell el
Amarna letters preserve many characteristic expressions.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assyrian letters</note>
The subsequent periods in Babylonia are represented by
few letters. It is not until we come down to the end of the
eighth century and the Sargonide times that we meet with
many letters. The archives of Nineveh contained immense
numbers. A great many of these are now in the Kouyunjik
Collections of the British Museum. There they early attracted
attention. Being written by the imperial officials to
the kings of Assyria, they contain most valuable material
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
<note place='margin'>Published texts</note>
for history. George Smith in 1871 gave extracts from several
of them in his <hi rend='italic'>History of Ashurbanipal</hi>. A number
were published in Rawlinson's <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Inscriptions of
Western Asia</hi>. Mr. S. A. Smith, in the <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the
Society of Biblical Archæology</hi>, 1887-89,<note place='foot'>IX., pp. 240-56;
X., pp. 60-72, 155-77, 305-15.</note> and in the second
and third volumes of his <hi rend='italic'>Keilschrifttexte Asurbanipals</hi> gave
some seventy more. Professor Delitzsch also published a
number in his <hi rend='italic'>Zur assyrisch-babylonischen
Briefliteratur</hi>,<note place='foot'>B. A. S., i., pp. 185-248,
613-31; ii., 19-62.</note>
and in his translations and comments laid the real foundation
for their interpretation. In 1892 Professor R. F. Harper
began the colossal task of publishing the text of all the
letters from Nineveh, in his <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian Letters
belonging to the K Collections of the British Museum</hi>,
of which eight volumes are already
published.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>University of Chicago Press</hi>;
Luzac, London.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Translations</note>
A considerable number of scholars have busied themselves
with the translation and elucidation of these texts. Professor
C. Johnston in his work, <hi rend='italic'>The Epistolary Literature of
the Assyrians and Babylonians</hi>;<note place='foot'>Baltimore,
1898.</note> C. van Gelderen, <hi rend='italic'>Ausgewählte
babylonisch-assyrische Briefe</hi>;<note place='foot'>B. A. S.,
iv., pp. 501-45.</note> A. J. Delattre, <hi rend='italic'>Quelques Lettres
Assyriennes</hi>;<note place='foot'>P. S. B. A., 1901, pp. 331-59.</note>
G. R. Berry, <hi rend='italic'>The Letters of the Rm. 2 Collection</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Semitic Literature</hi>,
xi., pp. 174-202; F. Martin, <hi rend='italic'>Lettres assyriennes
et babyloniennes</hi>&mdash;besides the many articles by other scholars
on particular words or subjects&mdash;have contributed to
the understanding of these difficult texts. Professor R. F.
Harper has published a few preliminary studies on these
texts.<note place='foot'>A. J. S. L., x., pp. 196-201; xiii., pp. 209-12,
xiv., pp. 1-16, 171-82; xv., pp. 129-44.</note> Dr. H. Winckler not only gave several
important texts in his <hi rend='italic'>Texte verschiedenen
Inhalts</hi>,<note place='foot'>Pfeiffer, Leipzig.</note> but translations
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
and comments on them in his <hi rend='italic'>Altorientalische
Forschungen</hi>.<note place='foot'>II., pp. 52, 58, 184 f., 302 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Late Babylonian letters</note>
The letter-texts of the latter Babylonian period at present
published are extremely few. Some may be found in Strassmaier's
great collection of <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte</hi>, among the
contracts. A list of those for the reigns of Nabonidus and
Nebuchadrezzar is given in Dr. K. L. Tallqvist's <hi rend='italic'>Die Sprache
der Contracte Nabû-nâ'ids</hi>, p. xviii.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Historical value of the letters</note>
One of the uses to which the letters may be put is to illustrate
the history of the time. From the letters of Ḥammurabi
we can gather a great deal of information as to the
civil policy of the reign. From the Tell el Amarna tablets
we may reconstruct almost a complete survey of the condition
of politics in Palestine. From the Assyrian letters we
can rewrite the history of affairs in Armenia at the end of
Sargon's reign, or the wars with Elam in Ashurbânipal's
time.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>General value</note>
The letters are also a rich mine of information on all sorts
of topics, and those very often on which almost all other
literatures are silent. We gain here a closer and more intimate
acquaintance with humanity than at any other period
of ancient history. We must not expect finality in our translations
for a long while to come. Fresh documents will continually
be found or published that will help us to revise
our views. But that is the perennial interest of the letters.
We may read and reread them, always finding something
fresh to combine with every new piece of information.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Methods of classification</note>
Several different methods of classifying the letters suggest
themselves. One plan would be to group those letters
which illustrate some phase of civil life. Thus we may collect
the references to medical cases, or the illustrations of
religious life, or the contributions to astronomy and astrology.
But none of these methods will be exhaustive or generally
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
applicable. A letter rarely deals with only one subject.
The only scientific classification seems to be that
adopted by Professor Harper in his edition of the Nineveh
letters, or Mr. King in his letters of Ḥammurabi. This is
to place together all the letters written by one scribe. Here
we have two difficulties. There may be more than one
scribe of the same name. Thus it is practically certain that
in Professor Harper's groups of letters apparently assigned
to one man, more than one person is often really involved.
Again, a very large number of letters no longer preserve the
name of their scribe. Only a prolonged study can reduce
these difficulties; it is not likely that we shall ever quite
eliminate error.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Royal letters</note>
There is one large group that has a claim to separate consideration.
Many letters are written by, or to, a king. They
are on various subjects. A subdivision might be made of
reports sent by officials concerning public affairs. But even
these often contain side-references; and at the last we have
really to consider each letter as a separate document.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='II. The Letters Of Hammurabi'/>
<head>II. The Letters Of Ḥammurabi</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Great historical value of this collection</note>
The letters of Ḥammurabi are by far the most important
collection of letters hitherto published for the period of the
First Dynasty of Babylon. They had a certain adventitious
value at one time, because one of them was thought to contain
the name of Chedorlaomer, and this association with
Ḥammurabi, as Amraphel, was exploited in the interests of
a defence of the historical value of Genesis xiv. Mr. L. W.
King's edition of the letters, however, showed that such a
use was unwarranted. But it served a much more useful
end, giving us a very full picture of the times of the founder
of the First Babylonian Empire. The excellent account
given by Mr. King of the contents of these letters is fairly
exhaustive. The importance of such sources for history
cannot be overestimated. They are contemporary. They
are not written to impress posterity, but with absolute
fidelity to fact. We may disbelieve some of the excuses
made for misconduct, but in the references to current events
or general customs we have a sure witness, if only we can
understand them. This is often difficult because a letter
presupposes relations between the correspondents which we
must conjecture.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The letters to Sin-iddinam</note>
Since Mr. King's introduction to his first volume gives a
full account of the few letters previously published, this
need not be reproduced here. Of Ḥammurabi's letters fifty-three
are addressed to one and the same man, Sin-iddinam.
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
It is doubtful whether he was the King of Larsa who bore
this name, or the official who in the next reign seems to be
Governor of Sippara. There are many persons who bore
this name known at this period. However, several mentions
of the temple of Shamash at Larsa occur in these letters and
there is a certain presumption that Sin-iddinam of Larsa was
the person intended.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ḥammurabi as an administrator</note>
Ḥammurabi's ability as an administrator, which these
letters reveal, and his care even for small details of his rule,
may well be the reason why his empire proved so stable.
He established a tradition which was long followed by his
successors. He organized his land, appointed governors,
and held them responsible to himself. He had a direct interest
in their doings and sent minute written instructions,
demanding reports, summoning defaulters to his presence,
or directing their punishment where they were. The dates
for his reign, as for others of the dynasty, show, not only
raids and conquests, but chiefly public works of utility.
The construction or repair of canals, public buildings,
temples, the ordering of justice, are works that repaid
his care.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His care for the revenues of the temples</note>
Ḥammurabi was a man of many business enterprises.
The collection of the temple revenues was an object of
his attention. There is no evidence that these were available
for his use, but he had a personal interest in all that
was right and just. To him the herdsmen and shepherds
of the temple flocks and herds had to report. He often
appears as restoring, rebuilding, or adorning shrines, and he
was careful of his religious duties. Thus he postponed a case
because of a festival at Ur, which he seems to have found
demanded the presence of one of the parties.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ordering of the calendar</note>
He had to settle important questions concerning the
calendar; whether or not reports of astronomical observations
were then received is not clear, but at any rate the
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
king decided when the intercalary months should be inserted.
Thus he told Sin-iddinam there was to be a
second Elul.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His supervision of justice</note>
The administration of justice was also no small part of
his work. Not only did he promulgate a code, but he also
superintended its execution. There was a right of appeal
to his judgment. He actively supervised his judges in the
provinces. Thus a case of bribery was reported from Dûr-gurgurri
and he instructed Sin-iddinam to investigate the
case and send the guilty parties to Babylon for punishment.
He upheld a merchant's claim against a city governor, for
the recovery of a loan. He protected the landowners
against money-lenders. He examined claims to land and
sent instructions to Sin-iddinam to carry out his decision.
Thefts of corn, loans withheld, rents, were adjudicated by
him. He summoned not only the parties, but the witnesses,
to Babylon. Prisoners were sent under escort, and arrests
ordered.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His private property</note>
The king's own herds and flocks were a personal care to
him. They were stationed in various parts of the country.
He received reports about them, or sent inspectors to report
upon them. On one occasion he summoned forty-seven
shepherds to come and report to him in Babylon. He ordered
additional shearers to assist those already at work.
He regulated supplies of wood, dates, seed, and corn. These
were often sent by ship, and there is evidence of a large
number of ships being employed, of varied capacities.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His building enterprises</note>
Public buildings demanded large gangs of workmen.
They were drawn from the slave and serf population. A
great many letters are concerned with the supply and movements
of these laborers. Whether forced labor was inflicted
as a punishment may be doubted. But the <foreign rend='italic'>corvée</foreign> was in
full operation. The hire of laborers is referred to, and it is
probable that the forced laborers were fed and clothed at
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
the expense of the state. Thus we see that Ḥammurabi
was a busy man and worked hard to build up his empire.
His successors, though we have fewer of their letters, seem
to have been fully as active.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The return of the goddesses of Emutbal to their homes</note>
It is not easy to select specimens for this period. Each
letter has an interest of its own, and it is tempting to include
most of them. But we may take the two letters referring
to the goddesses of Emutbal, because one of them
by a series of misreadings and misunderstandings was made
to contain the famous reference to Chedorlaomer. The
first<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 34.</note> may be rendered.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Now I am sending
Zikir-ilishu, the <hi rend='italic'>AB-AB-UL</hi>, and Ḥammurabi-banî, the
<hi rend='italic'>DU-GAB</hi>, to
bring the goddesses of Emutbal. Do thou forthwith embark the
goddesses in a procession-boat (state barge) and let them come to
Babylon. Let the hierodules come with them. For the sustenance
of the goddesses embark food, drink, sheep, ship's furniture, and
travelling expenses for the hierodules, until they reach Babylon.
Appoint men to draw the ropes, and <foreign rend='italic'>biḫru</foreign>
men, that the goddesses
may come safely to Babylon. Let them not delay but come quickly
to Babylon.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The date of their capture</note>
These goddesses were very likely captured during an expedition
to Emutbal which was a border province of Elam.
It is natural to associate this with the thirty-first year of
Ḥammurabi, for which the full date is:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>The year of Ḥammurabi, the king, in which by the help of Anu
and Bêl he established his good fortune, and his hand cast to the
earth the land of Iamutbal and Rim-Sin, the king.</q><note place='foot'>K.
L. Ḥ., iii., p. 237.</note>
</quote>

<p>
The transport of the goddesses was made possible by the
system of canals. Intercommunication was in an excellent
state, for Ḥammurabi ordered a man to be sent to Babylon
from Larsa, and allowed him two days, travelling day and
night. The hierodules are the female attendants of the goddesses.
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
The officers whom Ḥammurabi sent bear titles not
yet clearly recognized. The name Ḥammurabi-banî points
to a deification of the king. Whether the goddesses reached
Babylon and there brought misfortune on the country and
so were sent back again, or whether their restoration to their
shrines in Emutbal was part of the king's policy for a pacification
of the conquered country, does not appear. But we read in another
letter:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 45.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: The goddesses of
Emutbal, which are in thy command, the troops of Inuḫsamar shall
bring safely to thee. When they shall reach thee, combine the
troops with those in thy hands and restore the goddesses to their
shrines.</q>
</quote>

<p>
The construction of the passage seems to imply that the
goddesses had protected Inuḫ-samar. The latter was in
command of troops that were within Sin-iddinam's jurisdiction;
for when Sin-mâgir complained to Ḥammurabi that
Inuḫ-samar had impressed some of his servants for military
service contrary to a bond given him by the king,
Ḥammurabi referred the matter to Sin-iddinam, ordering
the servant to be given up.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No.
26.</note> It was this name Inuḫ-samar
that Scheil misread as Kudur-nûḫ-gamar.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The care of the canals</note>
A number of letters concern the canals of the country.
Thus we read:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 71.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Summon the people
who hold fields on the side of the Damanu canal, that they may
scour the Damanu canal. Within this present month let them finish
scouring the Damanu canal.</q>
</quote>

<p>
Here we are introduced to the duty which lay upon riparians
to keep the canals running alongside their land in order.
This was part of the <foreign rend='italic'>ilku</foreign>, or customary obligation. It
lay with the governor to enforce it. In another letter<note place='foot'>K.
L. Ḥ., No. 5.</note> the
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
king complains that a canal which had been partly cleared
had not been cleared as far as Erech, and so the boats could
not enter that city. Here Sin-iddinam was ordered to do
the work with the men at his disposal and complete it in
three days. After that he was to go on with the work he
had already been ordered to do. In another fragmentary
letter the king orders the clearing away of the water-plants
which had obstructed the course of the Euphrates between
Ur and Larsa. One is reminded of the <foreign rend='italic'>sudd</foreign> on the
Nile.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A case of bribery</note>
The case of bribery is referred to in a way that leaves it
rather doubtful whether a theft may not be meant. The
meaning of the word rendered <q>bribe</q> by King is unknown,
and his identification of <foreign rend='italic'>tâtu</foreign>
with <foreign rend='italic'>da'tu</foreign> is not certain. But
at any rate the wrong was brought under the cognizance of
Ḥammurabi, and he writes:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 11.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Shumma-ilu-lâ-ilu
saith thus, so saith he, <q>In Dûr-gurgurri bribery has taken place.
The people who took the bribe and the witnesses who know the affair
are here.</q> Thus he saith. Now I will send this same Shumma-ilu-lâ-ilu,
a <hi rend='italic'>DU-GAB</hi> and a ... to thee. When this letter is seen
inquire into the matter. If there is bribery, take the money, or what
was given as a bribe, seal it up and send to my presence. The people
that received the bribe, and the witnesses who know the case,
whom Shumma-ilu-lâ-ilu will disclose, send to me.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A case of oppression redressed</note>
A case of oppression by a governor is complained of, and
redressed by the king. He writes:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 6.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Lalu, the
<foreign rend='italic'>kadurru</foreign>,
hath informed me thus, saith he, <q>Ani-ellati, the governor
<foreign rend='italic'>rabiânu</foreign>,
has laid claim to [alienated] the field which I have held since ... and
[taken] the corn of the field.</q> Thus he hath informed me. The tablet
can be seen in the palace. Lalu holds two <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of land. Why has
Ani-ellati, the governor, laid claim to Lalu's field? Inquire into the
matter. If Ani-ellati has lent on mortgage to Lalu, the
<foreign rend='italic'>kadurru</foreign>, grant
him his debt and lay the blame on Ani-ellati, who lent on pledge.
</quote>

<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>

<p>
It is clear that Lalu was one of those privileged officials
who held lands by royal charter, and who could not be dispossessed
of their land. The Code directs<note place='foot'>§ 34.</note> that a governor
shall not lend on mortgage to a reeve or runner or tributary,
under pain of death. Although a <foreign rend='italic'>kadurru</foreign> is not there
named, this letter makes it probable he was similarly protected.
It is interesting to notice where the record was to
be found. The palace, or <q>great house,</q> was the residence
of the governor. The tablet probably recorded the appointment
of Lalu to his benefice; it therefore was his title-deed.
An interesting question may be raised here. Did Ḥammurabi
mean in his own palace? It may be so, for he writes
in another letter:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 76.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>The depository for deeds</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: One <hi rend='italic'>GAN</hi> of water-meadow,
a field in the district of Dûr-gurgurri is an old possession
of Ea-lubanî. In a tablet it is inscribed as his. Give the field
to Ea-lubanî.
</quote>

<p>
Now how could Ḥammurabi know this unless the tablet
had been shown to him? Perhaps the claimant brought
his tablet with him when he came to lay his plea before
the king. That is quite possible, but it may well be
that the king insisted that all title-deeds be deposited in
the capital.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Restitutions ordered</note>
An order for the restoration of stolen corn appears in
another letter:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 12.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Ṭummumu of Nippur
hath informed me thus, saith he, <q>I deposited seventy
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>
of corn in a granary in Unabu and Amêl-ili has opened the
granary and taken the corn.</q> Thus he hath informed me. Now
I will send Ṭummumu himself to thee. Send and let them
bring Amêlili to thee. See what they have to say. The corn
belonging to Ṭummumu which Amêl-ili took let him return to
Ṭummumu.
</quote>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<p>
Another letter reads thus:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 24.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Ilushu-iḳîsh, the
merchant, over five, has informed me thus, saith he, <q>Thirty
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of corn I gave to Sin-mâgir, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Šakkanak</foreign>, and I took his receipt.
I have asked for it for three years and he has not given back the
corn.</q> Thus hath he informed me. I have seen his receipt. Cause
Sin-mâgir to give up the corn and its interest and give it to
Ilu-shu-iḳîsh.
</quote>

<p>
The title <q>over five</q> seems to be meant literally. He
was a superior merchant. Like many another hint, this
speaks for the strict organization of each class of the community.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Šakkanak</foreign> was usually the superior official,
<q>governor,</q> of a city, or of a ward of a city. We are not
told what was Sin-mâgir's district. But it was under Sin-iddinam's
rule. In other letters we read of a Sin-mâgir being
sent to Babylon.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., Nos. 13, 41.</note>
Perhaps he refused to give up the corn.
</p>

<p>
Another letter illustrates the incidence of taxes and the
relations of landlord and tenant:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 28.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>About taxes</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: As to what I sent
to thee about the corn that is the tax on the field of Ibni-Martu,
which is in the hands of Etil-bi-Marduk, to be given to Ibni-Martu;
thou didst say, <q>Etil-bi-Marduk hath said thus, saith he, <q>I have
cultivated another field together with the field of Ibni-Martu, and
the corn is all garnered in one place, let them declare on oath before
God how much corn was from the field of Ibni-Martu and let them
take the tax.</q> Thus he said. But Ibni-Martu did not agree. Saith
he, <q>Without Ibni-Martu one can do nothing.</q> Thus he said, and
went away.</q> As to what thou didst send, <q>the corn, as much as
was in his field, should be declared before God and the tax given
him.</q> As thou didst send, let them declare before God how much
corn was in the field of Ibni-Martu, and pay Ibni-Martu the corn
that is the tax on his field.
</quote>

<p>
The case is not quite clear, but Ibni-Martu owed a tax
on his field. He had either mortgaged or let his field to
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
another. This tenant had not given him the corn to pay
the tax and excused himself on the ground that the produce
of the field was now mixed up with that of another
field. Hence he could not say how much the tax should
be; clearly it was proportionate to the yield. The method
of solving the difficulty was that a sworn estimate had to
be taken from competent witnesses and the tax levied on
that basis. This course was recommended by Sin-iddinam
in a previous report on the situation. The amount was to
be given to the landlord, who then had to pay the tax. He
clearly had no rent in corn from the land; but he could not
sell or mortgage his crop except subject to the tax. The
mortgagee was liable for the tax and the owner was bound
to pay. The mortgagee must furnish him the means to
do so; he had no right to claim the part of the crop due as
tax, whatever bargain he had made with the owner of the
land.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Commerce under strict control by the State</note>
<note place='margin'>The collection of taxes</note>
While agriculture was in the hands of free men who
only paid on produce, there are indications that commerce
was very strictly controlled by the State. The merchant
was the only money-lender as a rule. He also seems to
have acted as contractor, or farmer of taxes. The merchant,
or factor, was under the king's protection and also directly
responsible to him. Hence some have regarded him as a
royal official. But this is hardly correct. He was to Ḥammurabi
what the Jew of the Middle Ages was to the king
then, or the Stock Exchange or Bourse is now. Probably
we should not be far wrong in applying to him the term
<q>publican,</q> in the New Testament sense. He owed a certain
amount to the treasury, which he recouped from the
taxes due from the district for which he contracted. If he
did not secure enough, he had to make up the deficit. The
following letter<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 33.</note>
deals with what was probably common,
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
namely, an evident reluctance on the part of such officials to
settle accounts:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus Ḥammurabi: Concerning the chief collector,
Shêp-Sin, I wrote to thee, saying, <q>send him with one thousand
eight hundred <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of sesame and nineteen minas of silver, due from
him, as well as Sin-mushtal, the chief collector, with eighteen hundred
<hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of sesame and seven minas of silver, due from him, send them to
Babylon, and send with them the market rates (?)...</q> But thou
didst say that these chief collectors had said, <q>Just now is harvest-time,
after harvest we will go.</q> Thus they said, and thou didst tell
me. Now the harvest is over. On receipt of this tablet, when I
have sent to thee, send Shêp-Sin, the chief collector, with one thousand
eight hundred <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of sesame and nineteen minas of silver,
his due, and Sin-mushtal, the chief collector, with one thousand
eight hundred <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of sesame and seven minas of silver, his due, to
Babylon; and with them thy trustworthy guard, and with all their
property let them come and appear before me.
</quote>

<p>
The title which I have rendered <q>chief collector</q> may
be read <q>scribe of the merchants.</q> The sign <hi rend='italic'>PA</hi>, read
<foreign rend='italic'>aklu,</foreign> does in some of its connections mean
<q>scribe,</q> as <foreign rend='italic'>tamkaru</foreign>
does mean <q>merchant.</q> But the sign often denotes merely
an overseer. Hence we may take it that this was the derived
meaning. The reason may well be that over a group
of shepherds or merchants, one was always set who could
keep accounts. Hence the term <foreign rend='italic'>aklu</foreign>, properly a
<q>scribe,</q> came to be an <q>overseer.</q> Such a high official as the
<hi rend='italic'>PA Martu</hi> would be the Superintendent of Martu. The person
referred to in this letter, Shêp-Sin, occurs also in two other
letters of Ḥammurabi.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., Nos. 16, 30.</note>
In one, Sin-iddinam is told to send
him to Babylon with money; in the other, he complains of
not being able to collect money due to a temple, and having
to make up the deficit himself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Illegal impressment for public service</note>
The officials who were under obligation to furnish men for
public work and the army, doubtless often found a difficulty
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
in making up their quota, and impressed men who were not
strictly liable for duty. Such men as those called <hi rend='italic'>KA-DUR</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>KAPAR</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>MU</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>PATESI</hi>,
are named on the letters as
exempt from the service. But even this is not conclusive.
They are not exempted because they are of these ranks, but
because they have been wrongly assigned to the service.
Their masters may have been exempt from the liability to
furnish a man; or already engaged in royal service. Slaves
and poor men were subject, as we know from the Code.
Here is one of the letters on the question:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 3.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam say, thus saith Ḥammurabi: Naram-Sin, the
shepherd, hath said thus, saith he, <q>The herdsmen in my hands
have been put in the <foreign rend='italic'>corvée</foreign>.</q> Thus he said. The
herdsmen which are the property of Apil-Shamash and Naram-Sin shall not be put
in the <foreign rend='italic'>corvée</foreign>. Now summon Etil-bi-Marduk and the
officials and order them to return the herdsmen of Apil-Shamash and Naram-Sin,
whom they have taken.
</quote>

<p>
Here the <hi rend='italic'>KABAR</hi>, or herdsmen, are the employees of the
shepherd, his <q>sheep-boys.</q> Their absence would be a
danger to the flocks. The delinquent Etil-bi-Marduk was
often in fault. Several other complaints against him appear
in the letters, in his capacity of money-lender.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ.,
Nos. 18, 30, 73.</note> On
two occasions he was sent for by the king, evidently with
a view to punishment. Further, a <foreign rend='italic'>patêsi</foreign> in his service
appealed to be transferred to another master.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 38.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Letters Of Samsu-Iluna And His Immediate Successors</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Few in number</note>
The discovered letters of Samsu-iluna are as yet comparatively
few. They are not all addressed to one man.
We may take one or two specimens.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>About change of air for a goddess</note>
Like his father Ḥammurabi, Samsu-iluna cared for the
health of the goddesses, providing them with an occasional
change of scene. This time it is the goddess Anunitum,
who makes a journey:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 81.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Haiab ... say, thus saith Samsu-iluna: Concerning
Anunitum's going to Sippar-edina, I have sent an officer. Forthwith
let Anunitum go to Sippar-edina.
</quote>

<p>
The name of the official to whom the letter is sent is
broken and it could be completed in several different ways.
Sippar-edina was one quarter of Sippara.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Temple dues</note>
The following letter is concerned with the supply of
corn for the Shamash temple at Larsa. It is addressed to
three officials:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 49.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-ilu, Bîtu-rabi, and Nîḳ-Sin say, thus saith Samsu-iluna:
The corn for the treasure-house of the temple of Shamash of Larsa,
the property of Igmil-Sin which ye deliver, verily ye shall deliver.
Forthwith, from the corn that is in your hands, give corn for the
supply of food for the treasure-house of the temple of Shamash;
what is now standing due make up.
</quote>

<p>
The <q>treasure-house</q> may be only a <q>store-house</q> in
general. Instead of <q>make up,</q> we may render <q>buy.</q>
</p>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fishing rights</note>
Samsu-iluna looked into the details of his government
quite as closely as his father. We see him regulating
fishing rights:<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 80.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Sin-iddinam, Kâr-Sippar, and the judges of Sippara, say, thus
saith Samsu-iluna: They tell me that the ships of the fishermen
go down to the districts of Rabî and Shamkâni and catch fish. I
am sending an official of the palace-gate; when he shall reach thee
[summon] the ships of the fishermen (who have been catching
fish) in the districts of Rabî and Shamkâni, and let it not occur
again that the ships of the fishermen go down to the districts of
Rabî and Shamkâni.
</quote>

<p>
Clearly each district owned its own fishing rights, as it
was responsible for the repairs of the banks and scouring
the beds of the water-ways in it. It is far from unlikely
that Kâr-Sippar denotes some ruling body in Sippara, for
in the contracts we find that cases were brought before the
Kâr-Sippar. As they are associated with the judges of
Sippara, they may be the town elders. Sin-iddinam here
is hardly the official of Larsa to whom Ḥammurabi usually
wrote, though he might have been promoted to Sippara in
the meantime.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Business details</note>
Two other letters were addressed to him by Samsu-iluna,<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ.,
Nos. 79, 104.</note>
one about corn due from certain persons, the other about
a contingent of men sent to strengthen the walls of Sippar-Amnanu.
In another letter, the king summons to Babylon,
Sin-iddinam, Ibni-Marduk, the Kâr-Sippar, and the judges
of Sippara, but the letter<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 105.</note>
is too defaced for us to determine
the reason. It was to be <q>at seed-time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters of Abêshu'</note>
The letters of Abêshu' are somewhat more numerous.
Mr. King published thirteen. They are all more or less
defective, and add nothing to our knowledge beyond the
fact that the same policy of centralization went on.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of Ammi-ditana</note>
The letters of Ammi-ditana, two in number, are more
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
interesting. One deals with the supply of corn for men at
work on the citadel of Shagga, a town probably near Sippara.
The king orders the authorities of Sippara to make
up and send on the supply, and adds that the soothsayers
were to be consulted as to favorable auspices for sending
the corn.<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 56.</note>
The other deals, as do three letters of Abêshu',
with tribute due in wool from Sippar-iaḫruru. The report
from the superintendent of this source of revenue in each
case is that the tribute is over-due and the king sends a
peremptory order for it to be sent forthwith to Babylon.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of Ammi-zadûga</note>
Ammi-zadûga's letters, five in number, all happen to be
concerned with the annual sheep-shearing at Babylon.
They differ slightly, in the person addressed, and the date
assigned for the shearing. Thus one<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 50.</note> reads:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Ibni-Sin, son of Marduk-nâṣir, say, thus saith Ammi-zadûga:
A sheep-shearing will take place in the House of the New Year's
Festival. On receipt of this note, take the sheep ... and
the sheep which are sealed, which thou shall set in motion, and come
to Babylon. Delay not, reach Babylon on the first of Adar.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of Sin-iddinam</note>
The one letter written by Sin-iddinam<note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., No. 47.</note>
is addressed to the <foreign rend='italic'>rabiânu</foreign> of Katalla,
ordering him to send the plaintiff in a
suit to him. Very interesting is a letter from Tabbi-Wadi
and Mâr-Shamash to Aḫâti, the wife of Sin-iddinam,<note place='foot'>K.
L. Ḥ., No. 48.</note> asking
her to intercede for them with Sin-iddinam. He had himself
referred them to her, perhaps because their offence
immediately concerned her. They say that they are ill
acquainted with the ways of the court. From several
unusual forms of expression it may be concluded that they
were strangers who had settled in Babylonia. They do
not state either their offence or the grounds on which they
would be excused, but ask for an interview, that they may
remove Aḫâti's resentment against them.
</p>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Periphrasis for <q>king</q></note>
Some letters are addressed to <q>the man whom may Marduk
make to flourish.</q><note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Ana
Amélim-šha-Marduk-ubalaṭušhu.</foreign></note> Some have taken this as a proper
name. But that seems very unlikely. Others regard it as
a sort of polite address to a superior. Winckler<note place='foot'>A. O. F.,
ii., 312.</note> suggested
that it was an address to the king. The Code has made it
clear that the <foreign rend='italic'>amêlu</foreign> was the <q>gentleman,</q>
or <q>noble,</q> who
lived in a <q>palace,</q> or <q>great house.</q> Hence, these letters
may be addressed to any great official. But many turns of
expression support the view that the king is really meant;
he was thus the <q>First Gentleman</q> of Babylonia. It was
not till Ḥammurabi that the title <q>king</q> was generally
given. Perhaps the old nobles were slow to admit a king
over them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Freeing of runaway slaves</note>
As an example we may take:<note place='foot'>V. A.,
Th. 793; B. A. S., ii., p. 563.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To <q>the man whom may Marduk make to flourish</q> say, thus saith
Ashtamar-Adadi: May Shamash and Marduk ever make thee flourish.
The gardeners, inhabitants of Sippara, have spoken concerning their
servants who fled and have been recaptured. Therefore I have sent
a note thus to thee, I sent those men to thee. Accept their petition
(?) and may they be acceptable to thee before Shamash. Grant
their entreaty and set them free. If they come not to Babylon, do
this in my name.
</quote>

<p>
It is probable that recaptured runaway slaves, who
would not name their owners, were forfeit to the State.
The king is the only one who would have power to release
such slaves. It is clear that the recipient of the letter was
at Babylon.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Private Letters Of The First Dynasty Of Babylon</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Many details uncertain</note>
In these cases, as a rule, we know neither the sender nor
receiver, beyond their names, and what we can gather from
the letter itself. Hence a great deal must always remain
uncertain. Here is a letter which comes from a prisoner,
who says he is nearly starved and does not know why he
was imprisoned:<note place='foot'>B. 290 ff.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A prisoner's plea to his master for deliverance</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To my lord say, thus saith Bêlshunu, thy servant: From the time
that I was shut up in the house of the <foreign rend='italic'>abarakku</foreign>,
thou, my lord, hast kept me alive. What is the reason that my lord has neglected me
for five months? The house where I am imprisoned is a starvation-house.
Now have I made the jailer carry a letter to my lord. When
thou, my lord, shalt make an end of my misery, send, and the imprisonment,
since it has been ended by thee, I will cause to conduce to
thy blessing (I will even thank thee for). I am ill ... ten <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>
of <hi rend='italic'>SU-DA</hi>, thirty-one <hi rend='italic'>ḲA ZAG-ḤI-LI</hi> ...
two <hi rend='italic'>ḲA SAR-SAR EL-SAR</hi>
send me that I die not; and clothing send me that I may cover my nakedness.
A <foreign rend='italic'>ḫubidu</foreign> has come upon me on account of thee, my
lord. Either half a shekel of silver, or two minas of wool, send to me,
for my service, let him bring it. Let not the jailer be sent away
empty-handed. If he comes empty-handed, the dogs may eat me.
As thou, my lord, and the people of Sippara and Babylon, all of them
know, I am imprisoned, not for robbery, nor was I caught at burglary.
Thou, my lord, didst send me with oil across the river, but the Sutû
fell upon me and I was imprisoned. Speak a friendly word to the
servants of the king's <foreign rend='italic'>abarakku</foreign>.
Send, that I die not in the house
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
of misery. Send a <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of oil and five <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>
of salt. That which thou didst lately send no one gave me. Whatsoever thou sendest, send
it fastened up (?).
</quote>

<p>
There are many obscurities about this letter. Some are
caused by the difficulty of reading the defaced characters.
Some by the fact that the signs, printed here in capitals, are
ideograms whose meaning is not yet clear. The prisoner, if
his plea is true, was sent on an errand for his master, apparently
to trade for him. He was either robbed by the nomad
Sutû, or compelled to give up his oil to them. Why this
led to imprisonment is not clear, unless it was regarded as
furnishing supplies to the enemy. But though his master
did not get him out of prison, it seems that he had sent him
supplies from time to time. The word rendered <q>jailer</q> is
perhaps a name, Mâr-abulli, <q>son of the gate.</q> But it may
be a title used as a name, <q>Mr. Jailer.</q> The prisoner thinks
that it is in the power of his master to put an end to his
imprisonment and promises to be grateful. But he does not
seem sure whether his master can do this. He asks, however,
for further supplies, if he is to live. Let us hope he
was released or at least fed. We may perhaps conclude
that imprisonment was the punishment due for robbery and
burglary.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A father reminded of a broken promise</note>
Here is a letter reminding a father of a broken
promise:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 212.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To my father say, thus saith Elmeshu: Shamash and Marduk fill
with well-being the days of my father perpetually. My father, be thou
well, flourish; the God that preserves my father direct my father's
source of grace. I have sent to greet my father. May my father's
peace endure before Shamash and Marduk. From the time that Sin
Amurrû named my father's name, and I answered for my fault,
thou, my father, didst say, <q>When I shall go to Dûr-Ammi-zadûga,
which is on the River Sharḳu, I will forward a sheep and five minas
of silver, in a little while, to thee.</q> This thou saidest, my father,
and my expectation was from my father. But thou hast not sent;
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
and now, my father, thou hast returned to the presence of Taribu,
the Queen. I have sent a note to my father's presence. My father,
thou shalt not ask the purport of my note, until Lashêr has brought
me my father's note. My father has not sent one to bring even a
single shekel, in accordance with thy promise. Like Marduk and
Sin Amurrû, who hearken to my father, my ears are attentive. Let
my father send and let not my heart be vexed. Before Shamash and
Marduk, may I pray for my father.
</quote>

<p>
The letter suggests that the father was king, by the
phrase so common in the historical inscriptions, <q>named his
name,</q> usually equivalent to <q>nominated</q> to rule. The
word rendered <q>fault</q> is <foreign rend='italic'>sardu</foreign>,
which may be for <foreign rend='italic'>sartu</foreign>.
There is nothing to show whether Elmeshu is a man or
woman. There was an Elmeshu (the name means <q>Diamond</q>)
who was daughter of Ammi-ditana.<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align:
super'>1</hi> 193.</note> But the mention
of Dûr-Ammi-zadûga seems to demand a date at least as
late as that in which this wall or city was built. But Ammi-zadûga
succeeded Ammi-ditana. Unless the latter built
Dûr-Ammi-zadûga and called it after his son, we can hardly
identify this Elmeshu with the daughter of Ammi-ditana.
The mention of Sin Amurrû is not quite clear. We may
suppose two gods, Sin and Amurrû, or take the latter name
as an epithet, <q>Sin of the Amorites.</q> To have <q>the ears
attentive,</q> is to be in a state of expectation. In the last
sentence, Elmeshu seems to hint that, if she does not have
a favorable answer, she will not be able to pray for her
father. This may be regarded as an un-Christian attitude,
but people then thought more of the efficacy of prayer;
and it was a threat, if so meant, likely to have great weight
with the father. But it may mean that Elmeshu being
vowed to a religious life, yet needed material means to
maintain her alive, and she merely hopes, by her father's continued
sustenance of her, to be long spared to pray for him.
</p>

<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Request from a tenant for the grant of a good cow</note>
Another letter is apparently from a tenant, or serf, to his
landlord:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2185.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To my lord say, thus saith Ibgatum thy servant: As, my lord,
thou hast heard, the enemy has carried off my oxen. Never before
have I sent to thee, my lord. Now I have caused a letter to be
brought to thee, my lord. Do thou, my lord, send me one young cow.
I will weigh out and send five shekels of silver to thee, my lord. My
lord, what thou sayest, under the command of Marduk, thy protector,
what pleases thee, no one can hinder thee, my lord. My lord, do
thou make her worth the five shekels of silver that I have weighed
out and sent to thee. Do thou, my lord, treat seriously this request,
do not trifle with my wish. Let my lord not wonder at this request,
which I send my lord. I am thy servant. I will do thy
will, my lord. As to the young cow, which thou, my lord, dost
send, let her be on credit, and either to Baṣu, or wherever is convenient
to my lord, do thou send. With Ili-iḳîsham, my brother,
let the young cow come. And I, in order that my lord should quickly
consent and send the young cow, will forthwith weigh out and send
fifteen shekels of silver to thee, my lord.
</quote>

<p>
Evidently, the wise man sent only five shekels on deposit
with his brother, holding back the rest of the price, till he
had seen what sort of a cow he was to get for his money.
It was from this letter that Winckler<note place='foot'>A. O.
F., ii., p. 90.</note> deduced a meaning for <foreign rend='italic'>ṣamâdu</foreign>
something like <q>weigh out,</q> <q>pay,</q> whence a
better meaning for <foreign rend='italic'>ṣimittu</foreign>
than <q>yoke</q> was readily obtained.
As Dr. Peiser pointed out, the word is also used
in the Cappadocian tablets in a way that leaves small doubt
of its meaning. It may have come to mean simply <q>pay,</q>
but must have ordinarily meant <q>measure,</q> or <q>weigh,</q> according
as it was applied to grain, or money.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Authorization to compel a creditor to pay his debts</note>
Here is a very interesting example showing how the
merchants of those days transacted business at a
distance:<note place='foot'>B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 315.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Erib-Sin say, thus saith Ibni-Nabû, I am here (?): As to the
case of Ardi-ilishu, son of Ibni-Dibbara, I gave him two-thirds of a
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
mina of silver, and it was acknowledged in writing, in the presence
of my witnesses. He went to Assyria. He did not give the money
to Shamaiatu. I and Shamaiatu met in Daganna and disputed over
the affair. Said I, <q>I sent thee money by Ardi-ilishu.</q> He said,
<q>If Ardi-ilishu has paid the money, let him [<hi rend='italic'>here come some uncertain
signs</hi>].</q> And concerning what thou didst send about Shamash-bêl-ilâni's
fourteen shekels, I did not give him the money.
There is two-thirds of a mina due from Ardi-ilishu; take Ardi-ilishu
and cause him to weigh out the money, and its interest,
more or less, and from that take the fourteen shekels and send the
surplus.
</quote>

<p>
The two, Erib-Sin and Ibni-Nabû, are either partners, or
agents. The former had asked the latter to pay over fourteen
shekels to a certain Shamash-bêl-ilâni, either because
the latter had money of his, or had promised to honor his
order. But this particular order was not honored. Ibni-Nabû
had intrusted a sum of forty shekels to one Ardi-ilishu,
with which to pay Shamaiatu. But Ardi-ilishu had
gone off to Assyria without discharging the obligation. So
Shamaiatu had demanded payment and perhaps the doubtful
signs express the fact that Ibni-Nabû had to pay a second
time. Fortunately, he could prove that Ardi-ilishu
had had the money, having taken a receipt. He seems to
think that Erib-Sin can find Ardi-ilishu. Was the former
resident in Assyria? If so, this must be a copy of the letter
sent him. But perhaps Erib-Sin was to arrest the defaulter
on his return to Sippara. At any rate, this was a
warrant for so doing. That, perhaps, is why the letter was
kept. If Erib-Sin could get forty shekels and the interest,
he had a fair margin from which to pay the fourteen
shekels, due to him from Ibni-Nabû. But he had to take
risks. If Shamash-bêl-ilâni had given Erib-Sin consideration
for his order on Ibni-Nabû for fourteen shekels, he
was badly served.
</p>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A warning connected with the filing of a suit</note>
Here is a letter, warning a man of a suit brought against
him in his absence:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To my lord, say, thus saith Sin-taiar: May Shamash and Marduk
give thee health. As to the case of the field about which thou
didst send, belonging to the sons of Sin-rêmêni, which is in Bitûtu,
which my lord sold me for five minas of silver; Sin-aḫam-iddinam,
Marduk-taiar, and Nabû-malik, have gone about to the king, and
have turned over this title to Nûr-parim. Hasten, come, save thy
title from Nûr-parim.
</quote>

<p>
The word of most difficulty is <foreign rend='italic'>nistu</foreign>,
rendered <q>title.</q> It may mean something different, but the <q>title</q> seems the
most likely thing to be disputed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A request for fish and other food</note>
A letter to a father from an absent son<note place='foot'>S. 273.</note>
is interesting for
its personal character:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To my father say, thus saith Zimri-eraḫ, may Shamash and
Marduk give thee health forever. Be thou well. I have sent for
thy health. Tell me how thou art. I am located at Dûr-Sin on
the canal Kashtim-sikirim. There is no meat fit to eat. Now I
have made them bring two-thirds of a shekel of silver to thee. For
this money send some nice fish and something to eat.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A love-letter</note>
The following is what may be fairly described as a love-letter,
though the real relation between the correspondents
is not certain:<note place='foot'>S. 274.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Bibêa say, thus saith Gimil-Marduk: May Shamash and
Marduk for my sake preserve thy health forever. I have sent for
thy health. Tell me how thou art. I went to Babylon and did not
see thee. I was greatly disappointed. Send me the reason of thy
leaving, and let me be cheered. In Marchesvan do thou come.
For my sake keep well always.
</quote>

<p>
It is certain that Bibêa was a lady, perhaps the writer's
wife.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assyrian copies of old Babylonian letters</note>
The interest which these ancient letters inspire in us was
felt in the seventh century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, for there are two Assyrian
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
copies of early Babylonian letters, preserved in the remains
of Ashurbânipal's library. One was a letter from the
Babylonian King Adadi-shum-uṣur to Ashur-nirari and
Nabûdaian, kings of Assyria, about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
1250.<note place='foot'>III. R. 4, No. 5.</note> It is
too fragmentary to translate. Another<note place='foot'>K. 2, 41.</note> is a letter from
a King of Assyria to his father, who is King of Babylon.
The names are lost, and its contents cannot now be made
out. It was a copy made for Ashurbânipal, and has his
<q>library mark.</q><note place='foot'>K. L. Ḥ., i., p. xxiii., note 2.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Sennacherib's Letters To His Father, Sargon</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The proof that the letters are Sennacherib's</note>
Among the Ninevite collections we can single out several
periods where the history is supplemented by the letters.
Thus Sennacherib's letters to his father, Sargon, chiefly deal
with events in Armenia, which must have transpired during
Sargon's last few years, when his annals and other
historical inscriptions are silent. This view of them was
first worked out by the present writer,<note place='foot'>P. S.
B. A., 1895, p. 220 f.</note> and later with increased
material by R. C. Thompson.<note place='foot'>A. J. S. L.,
xvi., pp. 160-67.</note> Briefly put, the
argument from them is this: a person called Sennacherib,
who might be any officer from the times of Sargon onward,
writes to the king, whom he does not address as his father,
on the reports which have reached him from a number of
officials, concerning events in Armenia. We have, however,
two letters which refer to the same events, naming the same
officials and certainly from the same Sennacherib. In one
of them he is twice referred to as the king's son. The
officials named are all found in documents of the reign of
Sargon, or the early part of Sennacherib's reign. The King
of Armenia is named Argista in one of these reports to the
king, which belongs to the same group. The King of
Assyria himself is said to be at Babylon at the time. One
report quoted comes from Tabal, and is brought by the
major-domo of the Princess Aḫat-abisha, probably the daughter
of Sargon, who was married by him to the King of
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
Tabal. We have independent copies of these reports, quoted
by Sennacherib, which enlarge our knowledge of the events.
Hence, there can be no doubt that we have here Sennacherib's
letters to his father, Sargon, while that king was absent
in Babylonia. We are, therefore, able to reconstruct
a chapter of Assyrian history, on which the historical monuments
have nothing to say. The first letter reads thus:<note place='foot'>K. 181; H. 197.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A letter concerning events in Armenia</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Sennacherib. Peace be to the
king, my lord. There is peace in Assyria, peace in the temples,
peace in all the fortresses of the king. May the heart of the king,
my lord, be abundantly cheered. The land of the Ukkai has sent
to me, saying, when the King of Armenia came to the land of Gamir,
his forces were utterly defeated; he, his commanders, and their forces
were driven off; [<hi rend='italic'>then comes a broken space from which the few traces
left refer to <q>two commanders,</q> someone who <q>came,</q> someone or something
<q>was captured,</q> someone <q>came to me,</q> something <q>of his country,</q>
something <q>he appointed.</q></hi>] This was the news from the land of
the Ukkai. Ashur-riṣûa has sent, saying, <q>News from Armenia.
What I sent before, that is so. A great slaughter took place among
them. Now his land is quiet. His nobles are dead. He has come
into his own land. Ḳaḳḳadânu, his tartan, is taken, and the King
of Armenia is in the land of Uazaun.</q> This is the news from Ashur-riṣûa.
Nabû-li', the commander of Ḥalṣu, has sent to me, saying,
<q>Concerning the garrisons of the fortresses which are on the border,
I sent to them for news of the King of Armenia. They report that
when he came to the land of Gamir, his forces were all slain, three
of his nobles together with their forces were killed, he himself fled and
entered into his own land; but that as yet his camp is not attacked.</q>
This is the news from Nabû-li'. The King of Muṣaṣir, his brother,
and his son, have gone to greet the King of Armenia. A messenger
from Ḥupushkia has gone to greet him. The garrisons of the fortresses
which are on the boundary all send news like this. The letter
of Nabû-li', the major-domo of Aḫat-abisha, brought from Tabal; to
the king, my lord, I have sent it on.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Another letter regarding the movements of the Armenian king</note>
The second letter<note place='foot'>H. 198.</note> began in exactly the same way, so far
as one can judge from the traces of the first seven lines. As
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
before, Sennacherib quotes reports, which he has received,
in the sender's own words. From what is left of the first
report we learn that the King of Armenia had ordered the
forces at his command to capture the commanders of the
King of Assyria and bring them alive to him. The city of
Kumai is named as the place where these commanders were.
As yet the sender <q>is cut off</q> and has not withdrawn from
his post. But, as he has heard, so he has sent to the king's
son:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Now let him quickly send forces. This is the news from Ariê:
On the fourteenth of Elul, a letter came to me from Ashur-riṣûa, saying
that the King of Armenia, when the Zikirtai brought things to
him, at least obtained nothing, they returned empty-handed; that
he went to the city Uesi with his forces and entered it, that his forces
are in the city Uesi, that he and his forces are few, that they are
with him with their possessions.</q>
</quote>

<p>
This seems to be the end of Ashur-riṣûa's news. A few
traces refer to news from the Mannai concerning some <q>letter,</q>
<q>as yet</q> something has <q>not</q> happened.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>As I have heard I have sent, that the commander in the district,
in the midst of the city Uesi, he and his forces are assembled; that
with his troops he has set out and driven him out of Uesi, that he
has not seen the roads (to some place), that he has made good the
bridges, that as he has heard, whatever takes place, whether he comes
with his forces, or whether he goes off free, I will quickly send to the
king's son.</q>
</quote>

<p>
These fragments of the report are difficult to disentangle,
as the person referred to seems sometimes to be the King of
Armenia, sometimes another person. But all may be news
sent from the Mannai to Ashur-riṣûa.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
This is the news from Ashur-riṣûa: The land of Arzabia sends
word, saying, The land of the Ukkai has broken away from me (?),
that now they are killing me; you care for yourselves. I have sent
my body-guards to the Ukkai. The messengers of Arzabia said, ...
</quote>

<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>

<p>
Then follow a few traces from which we gather that a
messenger came to the writer and brought a present; that
the <q>Mannai said</q> something, someone <q>returned</q> and <q>I
appointed him</q> something, that a messenger from the land
of Sadudai came to Kalaḫ, that <q>I received and sealed</q>
something, and <q>I appointed</q> something. Again we have
a reference to the month of Elul, a letter, and the word
<q>brought.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>These letters explained by a comparison with those
of Ashur-riṣûa</note>
This letter is very obscure from the many lacunæ. We
naturally turn to the letters of Ashur-riṣûa. This man may
well be the same as the witness, <foreign rend='italic'>shaḳû</foreign>, and scribe of the
queen, at Kalaḫ in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 709. We have nine letters of his
referring to Armenian affairs. In one of them<note place='foot'>H. 492.</note> he
announces that <q>at the commencement of Nisan the King of Armenia
set out from Ṭurushpîa and went to Eliṣada, that Ḳaḳḳadânu,
his tartan, went into the city Uesi, that all the forces
of Armenia have gathered to Eliṣada.</q> The rest of the letter
is obscure. At the end of another<note place='foot'>H. 380.</note> he says: <q>I have
heard, saying, <q>the king has come into the midst of Uesi, as
yet he has not left.</q></q> In the same letter he reports that
<q>three thousand foot-soldiers, with their officers, belonging
to Sêtini, his military commander, have set out to Muṣaṣir,
crossed the river by night, that Sêtini has camels with him,
and that Sunâ, who is in command among the Ukkai, has
started with his troops for Muṣaṣir.</q> It is clear from these
that the movements here refer to the beginning of the year
after that in which, in Elul, the King of Armenia was in
Uesi, and before the defeat of Armenia by the Gimirri.
</p>

<p>
A mere glance at the contents of his other letters will
show their connection with these events. In one,<note place='foot'>H. 144.</note> he sends
Naragê, a colonel, with twenty men who had plotted against
the king and were caught. He mentions the capture of a
second tartan, Urṣini, in Ṭurushpîa and the mission of Urṣini's
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
brother, Apli-uknu, to see him there. The King of Armenia
had entered Ṭurushpîa with a number of restless men. In
another,<note place='foot'>H. 145.</note> he reports the return to Assyria of a
messenger from the Ukkai, who had gone up into Armenia; and mentions
Muṣaṣir. In a third,<note place='foot'>H. 146.</note> he reports that <q>Gurânia, Nagiu,
the fortresses of Armenia and Gimirri, are giving tribute to
Armenia.</q> But that <q>when the Armenians went to Gimirri,
they were badly defeated.</q> The rest is so injured as to give
little sense. In another,<note place='foot'>H. 147.</note> he names Ariê and Ariṣâ,
Dûr-Shamash, Barzanishtun, the city of Ishtar-dûri, and Shulmu-bêl-lashme;
but the text is so defective that one cannot
discern what he had to say about them. In another,<note place='foot'>H. 148.</note> he
acknowledges the king's order to send scouts into the neighborhood
of Ṭurushpîa. In another,<note place='foot'>H. 381.</note> he writes that <q>the
Mannai in the cities of Armenia on the coast of the sea
rebelled, that Apli-uknu, the commander of Muṣaṣir, and
Ṭunnaun, the commander of Kar-Sippar, went to the borders
of the Mannai, to garrison Armenia and made a slaughter
there, that all the commanders are present.</q> But these
are not the only references to him. Ṭâb-shâr-Ashur<note place='foot'>H. 101.</note> writes
to the king that he has received a letter from Ashur-riṣûa:
<q>Thus it is written in it, saying, a messenger of the Ukkai
went to Armenia, he has sent a letter to the palace, and
these are the contents of the letter, on the morning of the
sixth, this letter came to me; he sent, saying, the Ukkai
have heard concerning Ariê that he went against him (the
king of Armenia) and his city.</q> Then the letter becomes
very defective, but we hear again of Kumai and Eliṣ (clearly
the Eliṣada above). Ṭâb-shâr-Ashur again mentions Ashur-riṣûa,<note place='foot'>H.
488.</note> saying that a letter of his was brought, which referred
to the King of Armenia entering some city. But too little
is preserved to make out the message. In a report<note place='foot'>H. 490.</note> about
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
beams of wood, collected by Ashur-riṣûa, he is associated
with Ariê, and Uriṣâ, evidently the Ariṣâ above, and the
city Kumai. Finally, on a letter by Gabbu-ana-Ashur he is
mentioned in a most significant way. The writer says: <q>Concerning
the news which the king gave me about the garrisons
of Armenia, from the time that I entered the city Kurban,
my messengers went to Nabû-li', to Ashur-bêl-danân, to
Ashur-riṣûa; they came to me.</q> After a break he goes on,
<q>Like this I have heard; the Armenian (king) has not gone
out of Ṭurushpîa.</q> After some more uncertain traces, he
adds: <q>On the twenty-third of Tammuz I entered into Kurban,
on the twentieth of Ab I sent a letter to the king, my
lord.</q> It is evident that Nabû-li', Ashur-bêl-danân, and
Ashur-riṣûa were the commanders most concerned in these
events. Nabû-li', we have already seen, sent reports to Sennacherib;
no letters of Ashur-bêl-danân, yet published, seem
to refer to these events. But clearly the king was concerned
to hear from other quarters than Kalaḫ, where Sennacherib
evidently was. Ashur-riṣûa is also named elsewhere
on fragments not yet published.
</p>

<p>
We may now pursue the clew given by the fact that Uesi
was the city which seems to have been the bone of contention.
Thus Urzana, whose name recalls that of the King
of Muṣaṣir, who may have been reinstated as a vassal by
Sargon, writes<note place='foot'>H. 409.</note> to the
<foreign rend='italic'>nâgiru</foreign> of the palace:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>What thou didst send me, saying, Has the King of Armenia with
his troops moved away? He has gone. Where is he dwelling?
The commander of Uesi, the commander of the district of the
Ukkai, came, they sacrificed in the temple, they say that the king
has gone, he is dwelling in Uesi; the commanders returned and went
away. In Muṣaṣir they sacrificed. What thou didst send, saying,
Without the king's order let no one put his hand to the work, when
the king of Assyria shall come, I will serve him, what I have
[always] done I will keep doing, and this according to his hand (?).</q>
</quote>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<p>
Evidently Urzana lived in Muṣaṣir and was anxious to be
thought a faithful vassal. An unknown writer<note place='foot'>H. 444.</note> tells the
king that
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>five commanders of Armenia entered the city of Uesi, Sêteni [<hi rend='italic'>of
whom we heard above</hi>] commander of ... teni, Ḳaḳḳadânu of
the writer's district, or of Ukkai, Sakuatâ of Ḳaniun, Siblia of Alzi,
Ṭutu of Armiraliu, these are their names. With three underlings,
they entered Uesi. Now their forces are weak and weakening (?),
the forces are (?), the king has set out from Ṭurushpîa, he has come
into Kaniun. What the king, my lord, sent me, saying, <q>Send
scouts,</q> I have sent a second time. The spies (?) came, these are
the words they say, and the spies as yet have not started.</q>
</quote>

<p>
The whole tone of the letter and the fact that Ashur-riṣûa
above acknowledges having received an order to send
scouts make us think he is the unknown writer. But, of
course, the king may have sent the order to other commanders
as well. In an unpublished text we read that the
commander of Uesi was slain.
</p>

<p>
The references to Ṭurushpîa are also significant. We
know that this city was once the stronghold of Sardaurri,
King of Armenia, and was doubtless still attached to its
old rulers. We have a letter written by Upaḫḫir-Bêl,
doubtless the Eponym of <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 706, and governor of Amedi.
He writes in the same style as Sennacherib and Ashur-riṣûa:<note place='foot'>H.
424.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Concerning news of Armenia I sent scouts, they have returned;
thus they say: <q>The commander of that district, and the deputy-commander
with him, in Ḥarda, the district of the <foreign rend='italic'>sukallu</foreign>, keep
ward from city to city as far as Ṭurushpîa; weakness is written down,
the messenger of Argista has come,</q>
</quote>

<p>
and so on. The rest does not concern us here. But another
letter,<note place='foot'>H. 548.</note> evidently from the same writer, gives news from
Armenia and a message from Argista, which the writer says
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
he has answered, as the king directed. It also states that
the commander keeps ward in Ḥarda. Ṭurushpîa is also
mentioned on fragments not yet published.
</p>

<p>
Other fragments occur which clearly belong to this group.
Thus<note place='foot'>H. 619.</note> a letter from an unknown writer names Ashur-riṣûa
in connection with Kumai, Babutai, Ukkai, and Uliai, and
narrates something about ten commanders. The loss of
nine commanders in Armenia, at one time, is the subject of
a very fragmentary letter,<note place='foot'>H. 646.</note>
but it is not clear that it refers
to this period.
</p>

<p>
To the same period seems to belong another letter of
Sennacherib, probably to his father Sargon.<note place='foot'>H. 196.</note> It begins
with precisely the same formulæ of greeting in the first seven
lines. Then it goes on:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
The chieftains of the land of Kumuḫai (Commagene) have come
and brought tribute. Seven mule mares apiece they brought and
tribute with the mules. The chieftains are in the house appointed
for the Kumuḫai. They are fed at their own expense, they would
journey on to Babylon [where Sargon evidently is]. They have
brought <foreign rend='italic'>šaklâ</foreign> (?), they have received them here. As we
have told the king, my lord, let him send quickly. They brought
cloth and fruit each of them. The factors say that we have received
seven talents from them, that the Kumuḫai are not contented,
saying, <q>Our produce is reduced, let them bring the king's weavers
and let them take charge.</q> Let the king, my lord, send word to
whom they shall assign them.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A letter about the chieftains of the Kumuḫai</note>
Another letter-fragment only preserves the opening address.<note place='foot'>H.
199.</note> Another very defective letter<note place='foot'>H. 731.</note>
with the same introduction refers to Dûr-Sargon,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>in the district of Kurban are excessively great floods, they go on.</q>
</quote>

<p>
We know from another source that this was the case, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 708, when the floods came into the lower part of the
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
city, and the tribute could not be levied in the district.<note place='foot'>A.
D. D., 1141.</note> Yet another fragment, opening in precisely the same manner,
refers to a certain Nabû-eṭir-napshâte and the city of Kalḫu.<note place='foot'>H.
730.</note> Here also we have too little left to make out any connected
sense.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='VI. Letters From The Last Year Of Shamash-Shum-Ukin'/>
<head>VI. Letters From The Last Year Of Shamash-Shum-Ukîn</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The period well known</note>
Another period on which the letters throw considerable
light is the close of the reign of Shamash-shum-ukîn in
Babylon. This was coeval with the suppression of a great
combined rebellion against the rule of Assyria. From the
historical texts of Ashurbânipal's reign we know the names
of many of the actors in that great struggle. They are
frequently referred to in the letters. Already G. Smith, in
his <hi rend='italic'>History of Assurbanipal</hi>, 1871, had used the information
given by some of the letters. This was utilized by
C. P. Tiele in his <hi rend='italic'>Babylonisch-assyrische Geschichte</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The case of Nabû-bêl-shumâte</note>
But much more may be made out when the letters are
fully available. Thus Nabû-bêl-shumâte, grandson of Merodach
Baladan II., had been made King of the Sealands on
the death of his uncle, Nâ'id-Marduk. When the revolt
broke out, Ashurbânipal sent Assyrian troops to help Nabû-bêl-shumâte
to repel Shamash-shum-ukîn. During the long
process of suppressing the revolt, it is clear that Nabû-bêl-shumâte
conceived the idea of reasserting the independence
of the Sealands. He endeavored to gain the
alliance of the Assyrian garrison, some he imprisoned, others
may have joined him. On the fall of Babylon, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
648, he saw that Ashurbânipal's vengeance must overtake
him, so he fled to Elam. He took with him a certain number
of Assyrians, evidently to hold as hostages. Ashurbânipal
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
had a long score to settle with Elam. He began
by demanding of Indabigash the surrender of Nabû-bêl-shumâte
and the Assyrians with him. But before the
ambassador could deliver the message, Indabigash had
been succeeded by Ummanaldash. Nabû-bêl-shumâte was
evidently a difficult person to lay hands upon. At any rate,
Ummanaldash's land was invaded and devastated. But
when the Assyrian troops were gone, he again returned to
his capital, Madaktu, and Nabû-bêl-shumâte joined him
there. Again Ashurbânipal sent to demand his surrender.
Rather than further embarrass his host, and quite hopeless
of protection or pardon, Nabû-bêl-shumâte ordered
his armor-bearer to slay him. Ummanaldash attempted to
conciliate Ashurbânipal by sending the body of the dead
man and the head of the armor-bearer to him. Such is
the story as Ashurbânipal tells it in his great cylinder
inscription.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters about him</note>
The letters make no less than fifty distinct references to
him. The officers write many bad things of Nabû-bêl-shumâte,
and it is plain that he had been a very vicious enemy.
We have a number of letters from a writer of his name,
who may well be the King of the Sealands before he broke
with Assyria. Thus we read:<note place='foot'>H. 839.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>A letter reporting the dethronement of the
King of Elam</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Nabû-bêl-shumâte. Verily
peace be to the king, my lord; may Ashur, Nabû, and Marduk be
gracious to the king, my lord. Cheer of heart, health of body, and
length of days may they grant the king, my lord. As I hear, the
King of Elam is deposed and many cities have rebelled against him,
saying, <q>We will not come into thy hands.</q> According to what I
hear I have sent to the king, my lord. I have inhabited the Sealands
from the time of Nâ'id-Marduk. The brigands and fugitives who
came to the Gurunammu, five hundred of them, did Sin-balâṭsu-iḳbi,
when he caught them, lay in fetters and hand over to Natânu, the
King of the Uṭṭai, their ruler, whom the king had given them.
</quote>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<p>
Then come a number of defective lines, from which not
much can be made out. But there can be little doubt that
this letter was written in the days when policy still kept
him faithful to Assyria. There was another Nabû-bêl-shumâte,
whose letters<note place='foot'>H. 832, 833, 835, 836,
837.</note> begin quite differently, and refer to
horses and troops. There is even a third, a <foreign rend='italic'>ḳêpu</foreign> of
Birati, named by Tâb-ṣil-esharra,<note place='foot'>H. 88.</note> who was concerned in
repelling a raid on Sippara, and is named in a contract of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 686.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., 9.</note>
It is just possible that the second and third are the same man.
But while we must exercise care in assigning the references
of the letters, we have a guide in the historical connection.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bêl-ibnî's letters</note>
Bêl-ibnî was a very important officer who held the position
of a <foreign rend='italic'>manzâz pâni</foreign>, having the right of access to the
royal presence and a place near the king on all state occasions.
He is probably to be distinguished from the Bêl-ibnî
set on the throne of Babylon by Sennacherib in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
702. He is a frequent writer to the king during this period.
Ashurbânipal placed him over the Sealand after the
flight of Nabû-bêl-shumâte. The king's proclamation to
the Sealanders<note place='foot'>H. 289.</note> reads thus:
</p>

<note place='margin'>Letter appointing him governor of the Sealands</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Order of the king to the Sealanders, elders and juniors, my servants:
My peace be with you. May your hearts be cheered. See now
how my full gaze is upon you. And before the sin of Nabû-bêl-shumâte,
I appointed over you the courtesan of Menânu. Now I have
sent Bêl-ibnî, my <foreign rend='italic'>dubašu</foreign>,
to go before you. Whatever order is good
in my opinion which is [written] in my letters [obey].
</quote>

<p>
Then after some defaced lines, he threatens that if they
do not obey,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>I will send my troops.</q>
</quote>

<p>
This order is dated the fifth of Iyyar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 650. By that
date Nabû-bêl-shumâte had fled. It is not easy to say
whether Ashurbânipal had appointed a lady, once the
<foreign rend='italic'>ḫarimtu</foreign>,
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
or courtesan, of Menânu, as ruler of the Sealand
before Nabû-bêl-shumâte, or whether he means to call Nabû-bêl-shumâte
by this opprobrious epithet. Who is meant by
Menânu is hard to see, unless it be the Elamite King, Umman-minana,
the contemporary of Sennacherib, who had
protected the family of Merodach-Baladan II.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letter of Ummanaldash offering to give up Nabû-bêl-shumâte</note>
We have a fragmentary letter<note place='foot'>G. Smith, ii., pp. 51 ff.</note>
from the King of Elam,
Ummanaldash, to Ashurbânipal, which says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Letter of Ummanaldash, King of Elam, to Ashurbânipal, King of
Assyria, peace be to my brother. From the beginning, the Martenai
[<hi rend='italic'>Elamite name for the Sealanders, from Marratu,
<q>the Salt
Marshes</q></hi>] have been sinners against thee. Nabû-bêl-shumâte came
from there. The crossing of the land ... over against Elam
I broke down, [to keep him out]. Thou hast sent letters
[<hi rend='italic'>or forces?</hi>]
saying, <q>Send Nabû-bêl-shumâte.</q> I will seize Nabû-bêl-shumâte
and will send him to thee. The Martenai whom from the beginning
Nabû-bêl-shumâte brought us ... they are people who came
by water from ... it entered into their minds and they came,
they broke into Laḫiru and there they are. I will send to their border
my servants against them and by their hands I will send those who
have sinned against us. If they are in my land, I will send them by
their hands; and, if they have crossed the river, do thou [take them].
</quote>

<p>
The rest of the letter is hard to make out. It was dated
on the twenty-sixth of Tammuz, in the Eponymy of Nabû-shar-aḫêshu,
probably <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 645.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letter of Bêl-ibnî accusing Nabû-bêl-shumâte of
imprisoning his brother</note>
Bêl-ibnî had a great hatred for Nabû-bêl-shumâte. For
the latter had years before laid hands upon Bêl-ibnî's eldest
brother, Bêlshunu, and put him in prison. This we learn
from a letter to the king,<note place='foot'>H. 460.</note>
which, although the name of the
writer is lost, is clearly from Bêl-ibnî. The first few lines
yield no connected sense, but name Umman-shimash and the
nobles with him:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
When they assembled they spoke evil words against their king.
From those days they kept on plundering his land. Before the
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
forces of the lord of kings, my lord, want, like a pestilence, entered
the land. When the forces of the lord of kings, my lord, have
arrived at Dûr-ili, they shall not take a holiday; that smitten of
Bêl, accursed of the gods, Nabû-bêl-shumâte, and the sinners with
him, they shall capture and give them to the lord of kings, my lord.
And the Assyrians, as many as are with them, they shall release and
send to the lord of kings, my lord. Bêlshunu, my eldest brother, a
servant of the lord of kings, my lord, now four years ago, did that
smitten of Bêl, that accursed of the gods, Nabû-bêl-shumâte, when he
revolted, bind hand and foot with bronze and imprison him.
</quote>

<p>
The rest is obscure, but names Ṣalmu-shar-iḳbi as sending
news to the palace.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bêlshunu's identity</note>
The Bêlshunu here named is probably the Eponym of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 648, who was then governor of Ḫindana, who also dates
a letter from the king to Umman-shimash, which names Bêl-ibnî.
There are over fifty references in the letters to Bêl-ibnî,
most of which directly connect him with these events.
His duties in command of the Sealand brought him into relations
with the many Elamites, who in the frequent revolutions
in that land, fled for refuge to the Assyrians. Here is
one of the best of his letters to the king:<note place='foot'>H. 282.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>His letter about the fugitive Shumâ</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To the lord of kings, my lord, thy servant Bêl-ibnî. May Ashur,
Shamash, and Marduk decree length of days, cheer of heart, and
health of body to the lord of kings, my lord. Shumâ, son of Shum-iddina,
son of Gaḫal, sister's son to Tammaritu, fled from Elam and
came to the Daḫḫai. From the Daḫḫai, when I had taken him,
I made him cross over. He is ill. As soon as he has completely recovered
his health, I will send him to the king, my lord. A messenger
is here from Natan and the Pukudu, who are in Til-Ḥumba, to
say that they came before Nabû-bêl-shumâte at the city Targibâti.
They took an oath, by God, one with another, saying, <q>According to
agreement we will send thee all the news we hear.</q> And according to
contract they furnished fifty oxen for money at his hands, and said
to him, <q>Let our sheep come and among the Ubânât in the pasture
let them graze among them. Thou mayest have confidence in us.</q>
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
Now let a messenger of the king, my lord, come and make Natan
learn in his mind, that <q>if thou dost send anything for sale to Elam,
or one sheep be allotted to pasture in Elam, I will not suffer thee
to live.</q> I have sent trustworthy reports to the king, my lord.
</quote>

<p>
The incident here referred to, the reception of the fugitive
Shumâ, who probably on account of his illness was unable
to join his uncle Tammaritu, is very similar to that related
of Tammaritu himself. This King of Elam succeeded his
cousin Ummanigash, whom he dethroned, but after a short
reign was himself dethroned by the usurper Indabigash.
He and his brothers and family and eighty-five princes
of Elam, his supporters, fled by sea from Elam to the
marshes at the mouths of the Tigris and Euphrates. There
he fell sick. But Ashurbânipal sent him a friendly message,
and he came before the Assyrian governor, and kissed
the ground in token of submission. We learn that Marduk-shar-uṣur
was the officer who received him, and a very mutilated
letter seems to refer to it. He was probably the
Rabshakeh to whom Bêl-ibnî wrote<note place='foot'>H. 283.</note> complaining of certain
slanders about him. So even the faithful servant was not
entirely free from court intrigues. In another letter Bêl-ibnî
refers to his having received and sent on to the king,
Tammaritu, his brothers, family, and nobles.<note place='foot'>H. 284.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Many letters of this period</note>
Like Ummanigash and Indabigash, Tammaritu corresponded
with Ashurbânipal. We have letters from him to
the King of Assyria and from Ashurbânipal to him. Unfortunately
these letters are very imperfect, or not yet published.
He is mentioned continually in the letters. There
were several of the name: (1) son of Urtaku, third brother
of Teumman, (2) son of Teumman, slain with his father,
(3) son of Ummanigash, King of Elam, succeeded his cousin
Ummanigash, whom he dethroned, (4) son of Attamitu.
To which of these a reference is made is often hard to decide.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VII. Letters Regarding Affairs In Southern Babylonia</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Their character that of forecasts or omens</note>
<note place='margin'>Their great value</note>
Another group refers to the events at Ur, in the far
south of Babylonia. Sin-tabni-uṣur, son of Ningal-iddina,
was governor there during the time of Shamash-shum-ukîn's
great rebellion. This we learn from some of the forecast
tablets, published in George Smith's
<hi rend='italic'>Assurbanipal</hi>.<note place='foot'>Pages 184, 185.</note> The
greater part of these tablets is unintelligible, containing a
record of the omens observed, probably on inspection of the
entrails of the slaughtered sacrifices. What these symptoms
were cannot yet be determined. Much has been done by
Boissier in his <hi rend='italic'>Textes Assyriens relatifs au Présage</hi>, and
many articles contributed to various journals. The omens
are generally such as also occur in the tablets published
by Dr. Knudtzon in his <hi rend='italic'>Gebete on den Sonnengott</hi>, and
ably discussed by him there. The tablet evidently was
meant to submit these omens to some oracle that a prediction
might be given on their authority. The king also usually
stated his cause of anxiety and asked for guidance and
direction. These forecast tablets, many of which are dated,
are of the greatest service for the chronology of the period.
They have been partly discussed by the present writer.<note place='foot'>In
P. S. B. A., etc.</note>
Thus the two, which refer to Sin-tabni-uṣur, announce that
he is governor of Ur, and seem to inquire whether he can
be relied upon to prove faithful. We may conclude that his
appointment took place in Ab, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 648.
</p>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A letter of the governor of Erech</note>
From a letter,<note place='foot'>H. 754.</note> which G.
Smith<note place='foot'>Page 201.</note> ascribes to Kudur, governor
of Erech, we learn that he had heard from Sin-tabni-uṣur,
who reports that a messenger had arrived from
Shamash-shum-ukîn, inciting the people to rebel against
Ashurbânipal. As a result,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>the Gurunammu have rebelled against me. Re-enforce me at
once.</q>
</quote>

<p>
The good Kudur sent five or six hundred archers and joined
Aplîa, the governor of Arrapḫa, and Nûrêa, governor of
Ṣameda, and went to Ur. He was able to seize the leaders
of the revolt, among them Nabû-zêr-iddin. But someone
had captured Sin-tabni-uṣur. Bêl-ibnî is named, and later
Nabû-ushêzib, the archer, but the text is too mutilated to
make out a clear account. But it seems likely that Sin-tabni-uṣur
was rescued, and being re-enforced, held out well
for his master. Ashurbânipal writes to assure him of his
continued confidence.<note place='foot'>H. 290.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>The king's reply</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Message of the king to Sin-tabni-uṣur: It is well with me. May
thy heart be cheered. Concerning Sin-shar-uṣur, what thou didst
send. How could he say evil words of thee and I hear anything of
them? Shamash perverted his heart and Ummanigash slandered
thee before me and would give thee to death. Ashur, my god,
withholds me. I would not willingly slay my servant, and the support
of my father's house. In that case, thou wouldst perish with
thy lord's house. I would not see that. He and Ummanigash have
compassed thy death, but because I know thy faithfulness I have increased
my favor and bestowed honor upon thee. Is it not so? For
these two years thou hast not caused hostility or want to thy lord's
house. What could they say against a servant who has loved his lord's
house and I believe it? And with respect to the service which thou
and the Assyrians, thy brothers, have done, what thou sendest, all that
thou hast done and the guard thou hast kept, ... which is
pleasing before me [I will reward] and return thee favors to thy
children's children.
</quote>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The persons mentioned</note>
It is clear that Sin-shar-uṣur and Ummanigash had been
intriguing against Sin-tabni-uṣur. There are several persons
of the name Sin-shar-uṣur about this time. No less than
three Eponyms bear the name after <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
648. The <foreign rend='italic'>aba mâti</foreign>, or
governor of Hindana, or the <foreign rend='italic'>arḳû</foreign> might be meant here. But
there was a brother of Sin-tabni-uṣur, of this name, who perhaps
coveted his post. Among the many unpublished texts
which refer to him one may, perhaps, be found to explain
the hostility. Nor is it clear which Ummanigash is meant.
There was one of the three sons of Urtaku, who took refuge
at the court of Ashurbânipal, when their father was murdered
and dethroned by his brother, Teumman. When the
Assyrian king espoused his cause, he was enabled by Assyrian
troops to defeat and slay the usurper Teumman and
take the throne of Elam. But he was faithless and allied
himself with Shamash-shum-ukîn. He was dethroned by
his cousin, Tammaritu, shortly before the fall of Shamash-shum-ukîn.
That he, while at the Assyrian Court, should
have slandered the governor of Ur, is quite in accordance
with his character, but what was his purpose, or what he
alleged, we do not know. There was another Ummanigash,
brother of Urtaku; another, son of Umbadara; another, a
son of Amedirra. The latter raised a rebellion against Ummanaldash,
as we learn from a report by Bêl-ibnî.<note place='foot'>H. 280.</note> After
his usual salutations, Bêl-ibnî reports,
</p>

<note place='margin'>Bêl-ibnî's letter about Ummanigash</note>
<quote rend='display'>
When I left the Sealand, I sent five hundred soldiers, servants of my
lord, the king, to the city Ṣabdânu, saying, <q>Hold a fort in Ṣabdânu
and make raids into Elam, slay and make prisoners.</q> When they
went against Irgidu, a city two leagues this side of Susa, they slew
Ammaladin, the sheik of Iashi'ilu, his two brothers, three brothers of
his father, two of his brother's sons, Dalâ-ilu, son of Abi-iadi', and
two hundred well-born citizens of that city. They had a long journey
before them. They took one hundred and fifty prisoners. The
sheiks of Laḫiru and the people of Nugû', when they saw that my
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
raiders had extended on their farther side, were full of fear, sent word
and took the oath to Mushêzib-Marduk, my sister's son, a servant of
the king, my lord, whom I had appointed over the fort, saying, <q>We
will be servants of the King of Assyria.</q> When they had gathered
their bowmen, as many as they had, they went with Mushêzib-Marduk,
and marched into Elam.
</quote>

<p>
Here follows a bad break in the narrative, but Iḳisha-aplu
is named, and Bêl-ibnî promised to send on to the king
whatever they captured and brought to him. The letter
then resumes:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
News from Elam: they say that Ummanigash, son of Amedirra,
has rebelled against Ummanaldash. From the river Ḥudḫud as far
as the city Ḥa'adânu they have sided with him. Ummanaldash has
gathered his forces, and they are now encamped on the river opposite
one another. Iḳisha-aplu, whom I have sent to the palace, has
penetrated their designs. Let one question him in the palace.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Kudur's letters about the king's favorite</note>
Kudur, governor of Erech, who sent news of the outbreak
of rebellion in the south, gives us further information about
Mushêzib-Marduk, who was a favorite with the king. After
a long salutation occupying nearly the whole of the obverse,
with a short reference to a certain Upaḳu, the reverse side
goes on:<note place='foot'>H. 277.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Mushêzib-Marduk, Bêl-ibnî's sister's son, who has come two or
three times into the presence of the king, my lord, on a message from
Bêl-ibnî, Bêl-ibnî has appointed him concerning it (the case in hand).
The gate-keepers have told him that those soldiers are not lovers of the
house of my lord. It is not good for them to cross over to our midst.
They will give news of the land of the king, my lord, to Elam, and if
there be a famine in Elam, they will furnish them provisions. To the
king, my lord, I have sent; let the king, my lord, do what he sees fit.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The king's reply</note>
The king himself writes to Bêl-ibnî<note place='foot'>H. 399.</note> in a most friendly
way about Mushêzib-Marduk:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Message of the king to Bêl-ibnî: I am well. May thy heart be
cheered. Mushêzib-Marduk, about whom thou didst send, in the
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
fulness of time he shall enter my presence, I will appoint the paths
for his feet (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, make a way for his
advancement). The holiday in
Nineveh is not finished.
</quote>

<p>
Mushêzib-Marduk is also mentioned by Nabû-zêr-ukîn, in
a letter to the king,<note place='foot'>H. 412.</note> in close connection with
Shum-iddin, the governor of Dûr-ilu. It is not clear what the writer
had to say of him, but farther on in the letter Bêl-ibnî is
named. The same Nabû-zêr-ukîn is mentioned in a tablet
of epigraphs,<note place='foot'>K. 4453.</note> where he is associated with
Shamash-shum-ukîn, Tammaritu and Indabigash. He is there said to be
son of Nabû-mushêṣi. In another letter he writes with
Adadi-shum-uṣur, Nabû-shum-iddin, Ardi-Ea, and Ishtar-shum-êresh
to the king,<note place='foot'>H. 332.</note> but hardly anything remains except
a mention of Nineveh. The same group of writers is
elsewhere associated with Nabû-mushêṣi. Of another letter<note place='foot'>H. 513.</note>
from him to the king only the introduction is found.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Kudur's letters about the rebellion</note>
Kudur, governor of Erech, was a frequent correspondent
with the king. A score of letters from him to the king, or
from the king to him, are preserved. They are nearly all
concerned, more or less, with the events during the great
rebellion. There were several others of the name, one an
Elamite prince, son of Ummanaldash. The name itself may
be Elamite and may point to a strong admixture of Elamite
blood in Erech. The element Kudur occurs in such names
as Kudur-Mabug, Kudur-Naḫunte, and Kudur-lagamar, the
prototype of Chedorlaomer. There was another Kudur,
son of Dakkuri, who was brought captive to Assyria with
Shum-iddin. We may take as one example:<note place='foot'>H. 275.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king of countries, my lord, thy servant Kudur. May Bêl
and Nabû decree peace, health, and length of days for the king, my
lord, forever. Since I was in the enemy's country the Puḳudu have
made an end of the Bît-Amuḳâni, servants of my lord, the king, by
their attacks. The cities which were to be held for the king, my lord,
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
they captured. Let the servants of the king, my lord, march. They
have occupied the cities, killed the men and ravished the women.
Also they have attacked Ṣâbâ, the body-guard. The day they
reached Bît-Amuḳâni, it is said, the attackers attacked the body-guard.
I sent soldiers, saying, <q>Go, slay <q>Ala</q> with the pike, save the garrison
and take them captive.</q> When on the king's canal they attacked
Nabû-shar-uṣur, the colonel, he took them captive. Let the king,
my lord, inquire of them, as he can. The king, my lord, knows
how Bît-Amuḳâni is destroyed. The Puḳudu keep their land. The
soldiers with us have not set out, and they are the attackers, and we
abhor the alienation of territory. Let the king, my lord, give orders
and the soldiers shall set out against the cities, where they dwell.
</quote>

<p>
It seems that the men of Pekod (see Jer. i. 21, Ez. xxiii.
23) had made an attack upon Bît-Amuḳâni and nearly destroyed
the country. Kudur moved into the country, but
sent for explicit orders as to what he should do. He
changes his subject rather abruptly at times and it is not
quite clear always of whom he is speaking. The most obscure
sentence is where he says that <q>we abhor the alienation
of territory,</q> literally <q>the sin of the land.</q> It seems
that a land sinned when it was occupied by an enemy.
</p>

<p>
Ashurbânipal was deeply attached to his faithful servant,
as the following letter shows:<note place='foot'>H. 274.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>His affectionate letter of thanks for the king's favors</note>
<quote rend='display'>
To the king of countries, my lord, thy servant Kudur. Erech and
E-anna (the temple there) be gracious to the king of countries, my
lord. Daily I pray to Ishtar of Erech and Nanâ for the health of
the king, my lord's life. Iḳîsha-aplu, the doctor, whom the king, my
lord, sent to heal me, has restored me to life. The great gods of
heaven and earth make themselves gracious to the king, my lord, and
establish the throne of the king, my lord, in the midst of heaven forever.
I was one who was dead and the king, my lord, has restored
me to life. The benefits of the king, my lord, toward me are manifold.
I will come to see the king, my lord. I say to myself, I will
go and I will see the face of the king, my lord; then I will return
and live. The chief baker made me return to Erech from the journey,
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
saying, <q>A special messenger has brought a sealed despatch to
thee from the palace, thou must return with me to Erech.</q> He sent
me this order and made me return to Erech. The king, my lord,
must know this.
</quote>

<p>
The king had sent a doctor who had restored Kudur,
when he had despaired of himself. Then he started to
come and thank the king in person, but when on the road
the chief baker (if that was his right title) recalled him,
because a sealed despatch had reached Erech addressed to
him from the king. He sends at once this letter, not having
reached Erech again; at any rate, he does not refer to
the contents of the despatch.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Letters About Elam And Southern Babylonia</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The downfall of Elamite power</note>
In Elam, during the reign of Ashurbânipal, there was
a protracted series of revolutions, interspersed with invasions
of, or by, Assyria. The result was the utter decay of
Elamite power, and after Ashurbânipal's final reduction of
the country and sack of Susa, the land was an easy prey to
the Aryan invaders. From the story, as told by Ashurbânipal,
the Elamites richly deserved their fate, and lest we
should suspect him of undue partiality, the matter-of-fact
letters of his officers give us substantial grounds for crediting
his view. It seems that Urtaku, who came to the
throne of Elam in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 675, was always on good terms with
Assyria. We have a letter from Esarhaddon to him<note place='foot'>G. Sm., p. 24.</note>
in very friendly terms. It begins:
</p>

<note place='margin'>A friendly letter from Esarhaddon to Urtaku</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Letter of Esarhaddon, King of Assyria, to Urtaku, King of Elam:
I am well. Peace to thy gods and goddesses. There is peace in my
land and with my nobles, peace be to Urtaku, King of Elam, my
brother. There is peace with my sons and my daughters, peace be
to thy nobles and thy land. Now what Ashur, Sin, Shamash, Bêl,
Nabû, Ishtar of Nineveh, Ishtar of Arbela, the gods ... have
said, I have (fully?) accomplished.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This friendship at first maintained by Ashurbânipal</note>
The rest is obscure by reason of lacunæ. The reverse
seems to be inscribed with numerals, perhaps relating to
items of presents sent. Ashurbânipal kept up the friendship,
and, when a famine broke out in Elam, allowed some
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
<note place='margin'>The Elamites invade Babylonia</note>
<note place='margin'>The punishment</note>
Elamites to take refuge in his land, and afterwards restored
them to their country. He also sent grain into Elam itself.
But, perhaps as consequence of having spied out the land,
the Elamites contrived to make Urtaku attack Assyria. He
was incited to this act by Bêl-iḳisha, prince of the Gambûlai,
who inhabited the marshes about the mouth of the
Uknû, or Blue River, perhaps the modern Karoon, bordering
on Elam. Bêl-iḳisha rebelled against Assyria, and with his
troops joined Elam. Nabû-shum-êresh, the <hi rend='italic'>TIK-EN-NA</hi>, apparently
sheik of the district of Dupliash, another Assyrian
subject, seems to have done the same. Marduk-shum-ibnî,
the general of Urtaku, who led the invasion, was evidently
not an Elamite, but perhaps a Chaldean, or renegade
Babylonian. At any rate, the Elamites invaded Akkad
and covered the land like grasshoppers. They laid siege to
Babylon. On the approach of the Assyrian army, the invaders
fled. Urtaku died. Bêl-iḳisha was killed by a wild
boar. Nabû-shum-êresh was smitten with dropsy and died.
<q>In one year the gods cut them off.</q> The throne of Elam
fell to Teumman, a brother of Urtaku, who maintained a
hostile attitude. Dunânu, son and successor of Bêl-iḳisha,
joined Teumman. Ashurbânipal accordingly invaded Elam,
defeated and slew Teumman, ravaged the land of Gambulû
and captured Dunânu, who was taken to Nineveh and made
to march in the triumphal procession, with the head of
Teumman slung about his neck, and was finally tortured to
death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nabû-ushabshi's letters as governor of Southern Babylonia</note>
All the time that Shamash-shum-ukîn was king in Babylon,
Ashurbânipal seems to have retained the rule over
Southern Babylonia. At any rate, the governors of the
cities there wrote to him as their king and lord. The
above-mentioned revolt in Gambulû was a direct concern
of the governor of Erech, who seems to have suffered
severely. As late as the twentieth year of Ashurbânipal,
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
Nabû-ushabshi was governor there. We have many letters
from him to the king. One<note place='foot'>H. 269.</note> refers to the above events:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king of countries, my lord, thy servant Nabû-ushabshi.
Erech and E-anna (the temple of Ishtar at Erech), be gracious to
the king of countries, my lord. Daily I pray to Ishtar of Erech
and Nanâ for the well-being of the life of the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, sent, saying, <q>Take troops and send against
Gambulû. The gods of the king, my lord, assuredly know how,
from the time that Bêl-iḳisha revolted from the hands of the king,
my lord, and went to Elam, he plundered my father's house and
went about to kill my brother.</q>
</quote>

<p>
Then comes a break, in which the fragments indicate that
Nabû-ushabshi prayed daily for revenge. Then we read:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Now as the king, my lord, has sent, I will go and fulfil all his bidding.
If on any ground, over there, the inhabitants of Gambulû
will not obey, if it be pleasing to the king, my lord, let a messenger
come and let us assemble all Akkad and we will go with him,
we will win back the land and give it to the king, my lord. I
have sent. Let the king, my lord, do what he will. Preserve this
letter.
</quote>

<p>
The last request is very unusual, but we are glad it was
obeyed. Another of his letters refers to the intrigues of
Pir'-Bêl, son of Bêl-eṭir. This Bêl-eṭir may be the son of
Nabû-shum-êresh, who, with his brother, Nabû-nâ'id, was
carried captive to Nineveh, along with Dunânu, and there
made to desecrate the bones of their father. But it seems
possible that we have here to do with another Bêl-eṭir, as
these events seem earlier in the history. After the same
introduction as before, the letter<note place='foot'>H. 266.</note> reads:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Pir'-Bêl, the son of Bêl-eṭir, sometime after he and his father
went, some ten years ago, to Elam, came again from Elam to Akkad,
he and his father. When they came, whatever was evil against Assyria,
they kept on doing in Erech. Afterwards when they went
back to Elam, Bêl-eṭir, his father, died in Elam; and he in Marchesvan
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
brought letters to me, and to Aplîa, the governor, we sent the
letters on by Daru-Sharru, the body-guard.
</quote>

<p>
After some broken lines:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Now a certain servant of ... came with him to Erech.</q>
</quote>

<p>
we read:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
If he say to the king, my lord: <q>I have come from the land of
Elam,</q> let not the king, my lord, believe him. From the time
when in the month of Marchesvan, he brought the letters and we
sent them to the king, my lord, until now, he has not returned to
Elam. If the king, my lord, desire to verify these words, Idûa, a
servant of Kudur, who brought him to Erech, the contents are
known to him [<hi rend='italic'>there are some very obscure phrases in the next two
lines</hi>], and those letters, what lies are written, let him tell the king,
my lord, and as to those letters, which, in the month of Marchesvan
we sent to the king, my lord, by the hands of Daru-sharru, if the
king, my lord, does not understand, let the king, my lord, ask Daru-sharru,
the body-guard. To the king, my lord, I have sent, let the
king, my lord, be aware.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters about presents sent to the sanctuary of Erech</note>
One event, very characteristic of the times, is the subject
of three letters. The sanctuary of Ishtar, at Erech, was
celebrated far and wide, and on one occasion the King of
Elam sent gifts to it. These Nabû-ushabshi seems to have
been unable to possess himself of, or to send to the king.
Thus, we read:<note place='foot'>H. 268.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king of countries, my lord, thy servant, Nabû-ushabshi
[<hi rend='italic'>after the same introduction as before</hi>];
the sheep of the temple and
of the city Puḳudu are detained in the city Ru'ua, two shepherds of
them, one belonging to the temple, and the second from Puḳudu,
three white horses with harness and trappings of silver, and fittings
of bronze. On the trappings were written ... which the
King of Elam had sent to Ishtar of Erech. The horses, which they
brought, I will now preserve. Before the king, my lord, I was afraid
and in the temple I will not place them, until the shepherds bring
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
the three horses. To the king, my lord, I have sent, and the bronze
inscribed fittings, when I see them, I will send on to the king, my
lord. What the king my lord will, let him do.
</quote>

<p>
The king replied:<note place='foot'>H. 273.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To Nabû-ushabshi, concerning the horses about which thou didst
send, as yet thou hast not sent them to me. I have sent Ashur-gimil-tirru,
the <hi rend='italic'>abarakku</hi>, and troops with him. Whatever is good
to do, that do; whether the River Ḥarru be dammed, or whether
those people come, and as to the contents of the letter which thou
didst send. Bêl-eṭir, Arbaia, the colonels, two hundred horses in
their hands, I have sent to thee; let them stand on your side, let
them do the work.
</quote>

<p>
Evidently in consequence of this, we have another letter,<note place='foot'>H. 543.</note>
where both writer and recipient are unknown. It is much
injured, and while there are a few sentences intelligible, it
is not easy to say to what they refer. But on the reverse
after the first six or seven lines, the words of the last letter
are repeated verbatim. It is perhaps another letter from
the king to Nabû-ushabshi. The governors of Laḫiru and
Arbaḫa are said to be with the receiver of the letter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IX. Miscellaneous Assyrian Letters</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters about omens and predictions</note>
A very interesting group may be made up of letters concerned
with omens and predictions. The Assyrian kings
were firm believers in omens. They did not venture upon
any great undertaking without consulting the augurs. We
have numerous letters telling the king what days were
propitious for certain projects which he had formed. For
the most part, the whole point is obscure to us. We know
neither the purpose he had, the omens relied on, nor the real
grounds of the decision. Very often translation is impossible.
In some cases the publication of the innumerable
omen texts may give some light on the subject, but
usually it is quite impossible to see how these were made
to apply to the actual case. It is very like the case of
Nebuchadrezzar's dream. We are without any data to
work from.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>About a fox's falling into a well</note>
Here is an example of some interest, and more easily
understood than many:<note place='foot'>H. 142.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Nabûa. May Nabû and
Marduk be gracious to the king, my lord. On the seventh of Kislev
a fox entered into the city, and fell into a well, in the grove of
Ashur. They got him out, and killed him.
</quote>

<p>
Whether this was a good or evil omen, or even an omen
at all, we do not know. Nabûa is a very common name.
There are fourteen or fifteen astrological reports which bear
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
his name. In these he appears as an inhabitant of the city
Asshur. The name occurs some forty times in the contracts,
but it is clear that there were several of the name.
Perhaps the scribe who appears from <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
668 down to post-canon
times may be our writer, but, as he lived at Nineveh,
that is doubtful.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Regarding auspicious days for a journey</note>
Another case which is fairly intelligible is a letter of
Balasi and Nabû-aḫê-erba,<note place='foot'>H. 77.</note>
on a question of auspicious days
for a journey. It reads:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, our lord, thy servants, Balasi and Nabû-aḫê-erba.
Peace be to the king, our lord. May Nabû and Marduk be gracious
to the king, our lord. As to Ashur-mukîn-palêa, about whom the
king, our lord, has sent to us, may Ashur, Bêl, Sin, Shamash, and
Adad be gracious to him. May the king, our lord, see his well-being.
Things are auspicious for a journey. The second is auspicious.
The fourth extremely auspicious.
</quote>

<p>
We have fairly frequent references to Ashur-mukîn-palêa
in a way that shows that he was delicate. From a letter of
Ardi-Nabû's we learn that the order of seniority in the
family of Esarhaddon was Ashurbânipal, Shamash-shum-ukîn,
Sherûa-eṭirat (a princess), Ashur-mukin-palêa, Sharru-shame-erṣiti-balâṭsu-(iḳbi).
He is often named in the letters,
usually as king's son. But despite his delicate health
he survived to be made high-priest of Sin at Ḥarrân, by
his royal brother, and even as late as <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 648 his name occurs
in the contracts.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., 1053.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Balasi's letters about astrology</note>
Balasi is a frequent writer of astrological reports, some
five and twenty being preserved, besides some fifteen letters.
In the latter he is associated with Nabû-aḫê-erba no less
than seven times, once with Ishtar-shum-êresh also. In
these cases we probably have the same person. But the
name occurs often in the contracts, and there belongs to at
least three different men. Nabû-aḫê-erba was the writer of
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
some five and thirty astrological reports, besides some seven
or eight letters, usually with Balasi. The name belongs to
several persons named in the contracts.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ardi-Êa's letters of congratulation</note>
Ardi-Êa was also a frequent writer to the king. Besides
three or four astrological reports, he wrote nine letters to
the king. He is generally associated with Adadi-shum-uṣur,
Ishtar-shum-êresh, Akkullânu, or Marduk-shâkin-shum. But
one letter,<note place='foot'>H. 30.</note>
written to Sargon II., and mentioning Merodach-Baladan
II., clearly belongs to another Ardi-Êa. Most of
his letters are defective. The most intelligible<note place='foot'>H. 28.</note>
reads thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Ardi-Êa. Peace be to the
king, my lord. May Nabû, Marduk, Sin, Ningal, and Nusku be
gracious to the king, my lord. Sin, Ningal (and other gods) shall
grant health, long days, to the king, my lord. Day and night I
pray for the life of the king, my lord.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adadi-shum-uṣur's letters</note>
The great group of writers with whom he is associated
is responsible for a large number of letters. Adadi-shum-uṣur
wrote some thirty-five letters and five or six astrological
reports. He is especially prolix in his introduction.
Here is a specimen:<note place='foot'>H. 2.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Adadi-shum-uṣur. Peace be to
the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk be excessively gracious
to the king, my lord. The king of gods shall decree the name of
the king, my lord, to the kingdom of Assyria. Shamash and Adad,
in their changeless regard to the king, my lord, have confirmed him
in the kingdom of all lands. A gracious reign, settled days, years
of righteousness, plenteous rains, copious floods, high prices. The
gods are reverenced, the fear of God increased, the temples are
flourishing. The great gods of heaven and earth are exalted in the
reign of the king, my lord. Old men dance, young men sing, the
women and girls are given in marriage, the bridegrooms marry
wives, marriages are consummated, sons and daughters are begotten,
children are born. To those that have sinned and look for death,
the king, my lord, has given new life. Those that for many years
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
<note place='margin'>A plea for his son to be appointed to the court</note>
were captive, thou hast freed. They that many days were sick have
recovered. The hungry are satisfied. The lean grow fat. The
plantations are covered with fruits. Only I and Ardi-Gula among
them have our soul depressed, our heart disturbed. Lately has the
king, my lord, shown love for Nineveh, to his people, to his chiefs,
saying, <q>Bring your sons, let them stand before me.</q> Ardi-Gula,
my son is he, let him stand with them, before the king, my lord.
We with all the people will rejoice indeed, and dance for joy. My
eyes are set upon the king, my lord. They that stand in the palace,
all of them, love me not. There is not a friend of mine among
them, to whom I might give a present, and they would receive it,
and take up my cause. Let the king, my lord, take pity on his
servant. Among all those people, I hope none of my slanderers may
see the purpose of their hearts against me.
</quote>

<p>
Judging from the frequent mention of Ardi-Gula in
other letters and that he wrote to the king about his sons,
Ashurbânipal and Shamash-shum-ukîn, we may be sure the
old courtier got his request, and that he was writing
to Esarhaddon. The letters of Adadi-shum-uṣur concern
domestic affairs, the sickness of one, an auspicious day, the
health of another, rarely does he mention any news of
public interest. The persons about whom he writes are
the members of the royal family, Esarhaddon's children
and the above-named circle of officials. The king sent him
to see certain sick folk,<note place='foot'>H. 1.</note>
he writes about an eclipse, or a
ring, or something of the sort. He usually gives a very
long introduction; often the real message occupies only a
few lines.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Miscellaneous letters</note>
Marduk-shâkin-shum is another of the same group, with
twenty-five letters. They are of the same domestic nature
as the last. Ishtar-shum-êresh is the writer of a score of
letters and about thirty astrological reports. He was
evidently a younger member of the group, son of Nabû-zêr-lîshir,
and chief scribe to Ashurbânipal. In the reign
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
of Esarhaddon he ranked as a <foreign rend='italic'>mašmašsu</foreign>. Akkullânu, who
was an <foreign rend='italic'>êrib bîti</foreign>, of Asshur, writes sixteen letters and
some dozen astrological reports.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Nabûa's letters about the calendar</note>
We have seen that in the second epoch the king had to
fix the time when intercalary months should be inserted.
In this period the calendar was very carefully regulated by
astronomical observations. As a new month began on the
day on which the new moon was seen, it is clear that a
month would often exceed twenty-nine days, but that a
new moon might sometimes be seen on the twenty-ninth.
Nabûa, the astronomer of the city Asshur, sends a number
of such letters as:<note place='foot'>H. 825.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
On the twenty-ninth, we kept watch, we did not see the moon.
Nabû and Marduk be gracious to the king, my lord. From Nabûa
of Asshur.
</quote>

<p>
So Nabû-shum-iddin writes:<note place='foot'>H. 816.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the Gardener, my lord, thy servant Nabû-shum-iddin, the
<foreign rend='italic'>rabûte</foreign> of Nineveh.
Nabû and Marduk be gracious to the Gardener,
my lord. On the fourteenth we kept watch on the moon. The
moon suffered an eclipse.
</quote>

<p>
The gardener, or rather irrigator, may be a royal title.
At present these observations are useless to us in our
attempts to fix chronology, as we do not know the month
and year of many of them.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The queen-dowager's importance</note>
The queen-mother was always an important personage in
the state and she had very great influence indeed at court.
But probably few ladies ever obtained a higher degree of
power than did Naki'a, or Zakutu as she was also called, the
wife of Sennacherib and mother of Esarhaddon. She had a
sister Abirami.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., 70.</note>
The queen-mother resided in Laḫiru, but
there seem to have been more than one city of the name.
Her necklace, or some part of it, is in private possession
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
and has been described by Professor Scheil.<note place='foot'>Rec.
Trav., xx., p. 200.</note> She survived
her son, and, with her grandsons, Ashurbânipal, Shamash-shum-ukîn,
and the nobles of Assyria, issued a proclamation
to the empire, declaring Ashurbânipal the true heir to the
throne.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letter of Nâ'id-Marduk to her</note>
It is, of course, uncertain whether the person addressed
as mother of the king is always Zakûtu, since we cannot
always date the letters. But the letter of
Nâ'id-Marduk,<note place='foot'>W. Sm., p. 7.</note>
which names Ummanigash as King of Elam, was certainly
addressed to her. Nâ'id-Marduk was a son of Merodach
Baladan, who, in the reign of Esarhaddon, when his brother
Nabû-zêr-kînish-lîshir was killed by Ummanaldash II., threw
himself on the mercy of Esarhaddon and was by him made
ruler of his ancestral domain of Bît Jakin, as a vassal king.
He speaks for himself:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the mother of the king, my lord, thy servant Nâ'id-Marduk.
Peace be to the mother of the king, my lord. May Ashur, Shamash,
and Marduk give health to the king, my lord. May they decree the
cheer of heart of the mother of the king, my lord. From Elam they
came to me, saying, <q>They have seized the bridge.</q> When they
came, I sent to the mother of the king, my lord. Now let the
bridge be restored and the bolts of the bridge strengthened. They
say, <q>They have burnt it.</q> I have not sent them, we do not know.
They came, it was gone. To the mother of the king, my lord, I
will send. Do thou, my lord, send troops. The son of Ningal-iddina
has gone to the King of (Elam?) and taken the side of
Ḥubanigash. [<hi rend='italic'>Several lines follow
with only fragments of sentences.</hi>]
<q>Since these are trustworthy reports, whatever the Chaldees in future
send to the gods of the king, my lord. If a messenger of the King of
Elam does not bring messages to me, he shall enter and I will see
him, and whatever is his message, he shall explain until I understand.</q>
They came on the second of Ab, his messenger came to me to the
border; he did not pass over to hinterland, and I sent my messenger
to the palace. My lord, may he decide, and what is right for
the house of my lord, fulfil.
</quote>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<p>
It is evident that the writer regards the queen-mother as
so thoroughly identical with the king that he does not
scruple to address her as <q>my lord.</q> Despite several
lacunæ the general sense is clear. After the break the
passage in quotation marks seems to be quoted from a report
made to the writer. The sons of Ningal-iddina were
Sin-tabni-uṣur, Sin-balâṭsu-iḳbi, and Sin-shar-uṣur, all of
whom were in important commands in Southern Babylonia.
It seems probable that the events referred to in this letter
are those which led up to the Elamite invasion of Babylonia,
when they came raiding as far as Sippara. Esarhaddon
was away at the time in the west. There is no record
of how they were driven back.
</p>

<p>
Here is a letter from the king to his mother:<note place='foot'>H. 324.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>King's letter to her</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Message of the king to the king's mother: I am well. Peace be
to the king's mother. Concerning Amushe's servant, what thou
didst send me, as the king's mother has told me, I will at once order.
What thou hast said is extremely good. Wherefore should Ḥamunai
go?
</quote>

<p>
The meaning is obscured for us by our complete lack of
information as to the persons concerned. We may conjecture
that Ḥamunai was the servant of Amushe, but we do
not know. However, we see that the queen mother gave
good advice.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Aplîa's cordial letter to her</note>
Zakûtu must often have been a prey to great anxiety,
left in command as she was in Assyria, with her warrior
son nearly always away and such awkward neighbors as
the Elamites. But she was on the whole faithfully served.
It seems that the proud nobles of Assyria became restless
during Esarhaddon's long absences, for we learn from the
Babylonian Chronicle that, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 670, Esarhaddon put a
number of them to death. Here is a letter, however, from
an attached subject:<note place='foot'>H. 303.</note>
</p>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<quote rend='display'>
To the mother of the king, my lady, thy servant Aplîa. May
Bêl and Nabû be gracious to the mother of the king, my lady.
Every day I pray Nabû and Nanâ for life and health and length
of days, for the king of lands, my lord, and for the mother of the
king, my lady. May the mother of the king, my lady, be bright.
A messenger of good news from Bêl and Nabû has come from the
king of lands, my lord.
</quote>

<p>
There is a suggestion in the mention of Nanâ that Aplîa
wrote from Erech. He may be the Aplîa afterwards associated
with Bêl-ibnî and Kudur in the south. If so, we
may suppose that the messenger came from Esarhaddon,
from Egypt, by way of Southern Babylonia. One would
suppose that a messenger from Canaan, or the west, would
reach Nineveh, before Chaldea. But, of course, the queen-mother
may have been at Laḫiru. Only it is doubtful
whether she lived there, while Esarhaddon was away.
</p>

<p>
It is more likely still that the Aplîa is the same as the
<foreign rend='italic'>râb ali</foreign> of Laḫiru,
who in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c</hi>. 678 was over the house of the
queen-mother there.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 301.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Asharîdu's letter of loyalty</note>
Another letter<note place='foot'>H. 254.</note> conveys assurance of fidelity:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the mother of the king, my lord, thy servant Asharîdu. May
Nabû and Marduk be gracious to the mother of the king, my lord.
Daily I pray to Nêrgal and Lâz for the life and health of the king,
and the king's mother, my lords. There is peace in the city and
temples of the king and now I keep the watch for the king, my lord.
</quote>

<p>
That Asharîdu is the same as the writer of some thirty
astrological reports who was the son of Dankâ, a
<foreign rend='italic'>ḳatnu</foreign>,
and servant of the king, may be doubted. He is more likely
to be the author of several letters who seems to have been
connected with Borsippa. Another letter<note place='foot'>H. 368.</note>
is from Nêrgal-sharâni
in response to another about some sacrifices, sent
by the queen-mother. He prays for a thousand years of
rule for Esarhaddon, so there can be no mistake about the
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
period. He recounts the preparations made&mdash;an ox, two
sheep, and two hundred geese. But he says that Ninḳai,
the handmaid of the queen-mother, for some reason, will
not perform the sacrifice. The queen-mother is asked to
send authority for someone to open the treasury and perform
the work. The letter is defective and obscure by
reason of unknown words. Nêrgal-sharâni may be the same
Ashur-shum-uṣur who so often writes to the king about
this time. Again Nabû-shum-lîshir writes to the
queen-mother<note place='foot'>H. 263.</note>
about a woman, Kallati, who was intrusted to the
writer in the house of Shama', and about some sheep.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Medical letters</note>
<note place='margin'>Medical records numerous</note>
Another group includes the letters which refer to medical
treatment. Here especially Dr. C. Johnston, himself a
medical man, has made a most valuable start in his Assyrian
<hi rend='italic'>Epistolary Correspondence</hi>, and we can hardly do better than
to follow his guidance. As a rule, what these ancient peoples
said and thought of disease is very obscure to us. Many
terms were then, as now, used in the medical vocabulary
which were well known in ordinary language, but which
were given a distinctly different technical meaning. Great
attention was paid to surgery and medicine, as is shown by
the clauses in the Code.<note place='foot'>§§ 215-21.</note>
There are also a great number of
tablets dealing with medicine, some of which have been
published. Long ago Professor Sayce discussed one such
text under the title, <q>An Ancient Babylonian Work on
Medicine,</q><note place='foot'>Z. K. F. II.</note> and from the British Museum
Catalogue fully four hundred and fifty such texts are known. Dr. C. F. H.
Küchler in his <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Assyrischen
Medicin</hi> has made great progress toward settling the reading
and meaning of certain words and phrases. Dr. Baron
Felix von Oefele, who has devoted much study to ancient
medicine in general, has made noteworthy contributions to
the study, by his articles in learned journals. Still, the
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
<note place='margin'>Exorcism as well as healing the duty of a physician</note>
great obstacle is that so much of the materia medica, which
was a very full one, is unknown; and the diseases appear
under names which do not assist us in determining the
meaning. The medical treatises considered affections of all
parts of the body, and made much of symptoms. They
prescribe roots and oils and a great variety of powdered
drugs. Some of the treatment is evidently based on extended
trial and observation. But also much reliance was
placed on charms, and diseases were associated with demons.
To drive away the demon, as well as cure the pain, was the
doctor's duty. There was full recognition of the mental
factor in sickness.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A letter reporting the progress of a disease</note>
With considerable hesitation the following two letters
from the physician Ardi-Nanâ to the king Esarhaddon are
given, in which Dr. C. Johnston's rendering is closely followed.
In the first, Ardi-Nanâ reports on the state of a
patient, perhaps one of the young princes, who was suffering
from a disease of the eyes, or perhaps facial erysipelas. He
was progressing so well that the physician piously opines
that some god has taken the case under his care. The gods
who were special patrons of the healing art were Ninip
and Gula, whose blessing the physician accordingly invokes.
We read:<note place='foot'>H. 392.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Ardi-Nanâ. May it be peace
in the highest degree to the king, my lord; may Ninip and Gula
give cheer of heart and health of body to the king, my lord. It is
extremely well with that poor man whose eyes are diseased. I had
applied a dressing to him, it covered his face. Yesterday, at evening,
I undid the bandage which held it, I removed the dressing
which was upon him. There was pus upon the dressing as much as
the tip of the little finger. Thy gods, if any of them has put his
hand to the matter, he has indeed given his order. It is extremely
well. Let the heart of the king, my lord, be cheered. In seven or
eight days he will be well.
</quote>

<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>

<p>
There is also another letter<note place='foot'>H. 108.</note> from Ardi-Nanâ to the king,
but part of it is too defective to render. It begins in exactly
the same way as before, save that greeting is also sent
to the king's son.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
For the cure which we wrought on ... we were given five-sixths
of a shekel. The day he came, he recovered, he recovered his
strength, he stayed until.... Concerning the patient who had
blood run from his nose, the messenger has told me, saying, <q>Yesterday,
at evening, much blood ran.</q> Those dressings are not with
knowledge. They have been placed upon the breathing passages of
the nose and oppress the breathing and come off, because of the
bleeding. Let them be placed within the nostrils, they will preserve
the breath and the blood will be held back. If it is right in the
sight of the king, in the morning I will come and prescribe for him.
Now let me hear his well-being.
</quote>

<p>
The messenger here was a <hi rend='italic'>RAB MU-GI</hi>, in which title it
has been proposed to see the original of the Rabmag of
Jeremiah xxxix. 3. He was a high official charged with the
care of horses and chariots, and here sent to hear news of
the patient. There is no evidence that he had any medical
knowledge himself. In another letter,<note place='foot'>H. 109.</note> Ardi-Nanâ writes
concerning Ashur-mukîn-palêa, a younger son of Esarhaddon
and brother of Ashurbânipal. He bids the king
not to fear. The young prince seems to have been in the
doctor's care. Further he writes about the health of a tooth
(of the prince's?) about which the king had sent to inquire.
He had greatly improved its condition (literally, uplifted its
head). In another letter,<note place='foot'>H. 110.</note> also partly defective, he
directs the king to anoint himself as a protection against draughts
(?), to drink pure water, and to wash his hands frequently
in a bowl. Presently the rash (?) will disappear. In
another still more defective letter<note place='foot'>H. 111.</note> he mentions the plant
<foreign rend='italic'>martakal</foreign>, to which magical efficacy was ascribed. Another
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
long letter,<note place='foot'>H. 391.</note> after the same complimentary opening as the
others, goes on:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Continually has the king, my lord, said to me, thus, <q>The nature
of my disease is this, thou hast not seen to it, its recovery thou hast
not effected.</q> Formerly I said before the king, my lord, <q>The ulcer
is incurable (?), I cannot prescribe for it.</q> Now, however, I have
sealed a letter and sent it. In the presence of the king, let them
read it, I will prescribe for the king, my lord. If it be agreeable to
the king, my lord, let a magician do his work on him. Let the
king apply a lotion (?). Shortly the sore will be loosed. This lotion
of oils (?) let the king apply two or three times. The king will
know if the king says ...
</quote>

<p>
The rest is obscure, simply because we do not know what
the disease, or remedy, was.
</p>

<p>
Shamash-mîtu-uballiṭ, probably the youngest son of Esarhaddon,
writes to the king, but whether to his father or his
brother Ashurbânipal does not seem clear, about the health
of a lady, in whose well-being the king seemed to take
interest.<note place='foot'>H. 341.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Shamash-mîtu-uballiṭ. Verily
peace be to the king, my lord, may Nabû and Marduk be excessively
gracious to the king, my lord. Verily the king's handmaid, Bau-gâmelat
is excessively ill, she can eat nothing. Forsooth let the
king, my lord, send an order and let a doctor come and see her.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Letters regarding the appointment of officials</note>
There is also an interesting letter concerning the appointment
of a successor to a dead official,<note place='foot'>H. 577.</note> sent by a writer
whose name is lost:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant, ... verily peace to the
king, my lord. May Ashur and Beltu be gracious to the king, my
lord. Concerning the overseer of the house of the seers, who is dead,
as I said in the presence of the king, my lord, to wit, his son, his
brother's son, are alive. Now his son, his brother's son, and Simânai,
the son of Nabû-uballiṭ, and the son of the father's brother, of Ashur-nâ'id,
the deputy priest, with them, shall come into the presence of the
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
king, my lord. Whoever shall find favor in the sight of the king, my
lord, let the king, my lord, appoint.
</quote>

<p>
It is clear that succession was not purely hereditary.
Even when the son was alive, he might be passed over in
favor of a cousin, or for a still more distant relation. There
are many other interesting cases where the king inquires
for the proper persons to be placed in the offices vacated
through death or deposition. For example, when Esarhaddon
began to set in order the temple services, he heard
the following report:<note place='foot'>H. 43.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the king, my lord, thy servant Akkullânu. Peace be to the
king, my lord. Nabû and Marduk be gracious to the king, my lord.
In the long desuetude of the customary rights of Ashur, regarding
which the king, my lord, sent word to his servant, saying, <q>Who
among the magnates have not complied, have not given, be it much
or little (their default),</q> yesterday I could not write to the king,
my lord. Now these are the magnates who have not given their dues:
the governors of Barḫalza, Raṣappa, Kalzi, Isana, Bêlê, Kullania,
Arpadda; these have failed to pay their dues. Raṣappa, Barḫalza,
Diḳuḳina, the chief of the vineyards, Daian-Adadi, Isana, Ḫalziatbar,
Birtu, Arzuḫina, Arbailu, Guzana, Sharish, Diḫnunna, Rimusu, all
these have not given the barley and wheat due from them. And
as to the overseer of the bakehouse, the overseer of the larder and
the chief purveyors, concerning whom the king, my lord, inquired,
they are removed from their posts, and this is alleged as the reason:
The overseer of the bakehouse is a child, Sennacherib removed him;
Ashur-zêr-iddin, the priest of Nineveh, slandered him. I was frightened
at the troubles. He had not committed any great crime....
The overseer of the larder had broken (?) a dish of Ashur's, for this
deed thy father removed him from charge of Ashur's dish, and appointed
a turban-maker's son; he is without education. And concerning
the chief purveyors, Sennacherib made a reduction of their
allowances, and the son of the turban-maker receives the rest. Now
for six years he has been dead and his son indeed stands in his office.
Justice has been in abeyance since Sargon. Sennacherib was the remover.
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
This is according to their reasons. The king, my lord, as
he will, let him do.
</quote>

<p>
The text is difficult, partly because some signs are defaced,
partly because some words could be read more ways than
one, and others are obscure. It seems quite clear that the
cult of Ashur had greatly suffered. We know from the
Ḥarrân census that certain lands were charged with dues
to the temples, others with salaries to officials. The list of
defaulters is of geographical value. The deposition of rightful
temple officers and the intrusion of unworthy substitutes,
on slight grounds, is charged to Sennacherib. He
was evidently estranged from the cult of Ashur. Doubtless
a comparison of other letters will clear up some of the
obscurities, but sufficient is clear to indicate the importance
of such documents.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Women's letters</note>
It is of interest to note that we have a few letters sent by
women. We may select the following:<note place='foot'>H. 220.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
To the scribe of the palace, my lord, thy handmaid Sarai. Bêl,
Bêltu (of Nineveh?), Bêltu of Babylon, Nabû, Tashmetum, Ishtar
of Nineveh, Ishtar of Arbela, be gracious to my lord. Long days,
health of mind, health of body, may they give to my lord. The servants
of my lord, whom the governor of Bît Naialani took, seven
souls in all, he gave to Marduk-erba. Now the people are here, they
have come to me and say thus: <q>Say to the scribe of the palace, Do
not cause them to enter into the house of Marduk-erba.</q> The
<foreign rend='italic'>šâḳu</foreign>
has sealed for them, now he is with them.
</quote>

<p>
Evidently the lady Sarai had great influence with the scribe
of the palace; perhaps she was his wife. The reason why
the governor took certain servants of his and gave them to
Marduk-erba is not clear. Perhaps they were sold for some
government claim. It seems that the lady wished to keep
them back, but that the purchaser had called and was about
to take them away, unless the scribe in some way intervened.
</p>

<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Private letters</note>
A few quite private letters found their way into the
archives of Nineveh, unless indeed this is a mere freak of
the discoverers. Thus:<note place='foot'>H. 345.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Note from Marduk to Kurigalzu, his brother: Bêl and Nabû seek
the peace of my brother. Wherefore have I not seen thy messenger?
Until he enter Borsippa, when I see thy messenger, my heart shall
drink the wine of joy. Let my brother send so many pots.
</quote>

<p>
Here is another from Borsippa:<note place='foot'>H. 219.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Note from Bêl-upaḳ to Kunâ, his father: Peace be to my father.
Daily I pray to Nabû and Nanâ for my father's health of life and I
have fulfilled the duty to Ezida (the temple of Nabû at Borsippa)
for thy sake. When I inquired of Mâr-bîti (a divine name) for thy
sake, a fixed time of peace was taken up to the fourth day. Thy
workman is informed concerning everything whatever is safe according
to his (the god's) word.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reports and lists</note>
As before remarked, many letters are notices of the movements
of horses. These are really obscure in that we do not
know what the real purpose of the reports was. They are
very similar to many reports which lack the form of address
that marks a letter. Many of the terms applied to
the horses are also obscure and there is no way to translate
them. In other cases we have reports to the king or his
officials on various every-day subjects. A list of slaves
assigned to one or more men, a list of guests, men of high
rank, sent to stay with certain officials, lists of furniture and
effects, including books, sent to Ḥarrân with one of the
princes, all serve to throw light upon the daily life at the
court of Nineveh. Incidentally we have many hints for
history as well as life and manners. But such lists and
reports do not lend themselves to translation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Inquiries of the oracles</note>
A group of texts, very similar to the letters, only with
an especial character of their own, are the inquiries addressed
by Esarhaddon and Ashurbânipal to the oracle of
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
the sun-god. Their great interest lies in the fact that they
usually state the events which cause the king's anxiety
and so make important contributions to history. But the
larger part of them consist of a detailed statement of what
omens have been observed by the augurs on examining the
entrails of the sacrifices. On these it is probable that the
sun-god was to base his opinion. He would know and
declare what they portended.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Metrology</note>
Occasionally a letter serves to make a contribution to
some subject which is of interest apart from the events of
the day. Thus, information is furnished regarding metrology
in a letter primarily concerned with materials for the
repair of a temple or palace.<note place='foot'>H. 566.</note> There we read of <q>six
articles of <foreign rend='italic'>mismakanna</foreign> wood, six
<hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> apiece, one cubit long and
one cubit thick.</q> The thickness is clearly a cubit each way,
and we learn that a cubit cube contained six <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi>. There
are many letters and fragments which concern beams of
wood and stones sent from great distances for buildings and
repairs. When these are all published and considered together,
no doubt they will clear up the difficulties which at
present render translation impossible.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Diary of a journey</note>
A fragmentary report&mdash;it may have been a letter&mdash;gives
a diary of a journey. If we could complete it, or find a few
more like it, we should have a knowledge of geography
such as we have not for any other part of the world for early
times.<note place='foot'>A. D. D., No. 1096.</note> We may summarize it as follows: On
the sixth, the writer went from Bagarri to Sarî, from Sarî to Arzuḫina, from
Arzuḫina to Tel-Arzuḫina. He stated the distances from city
to city, but these are now lost. This was the first journey.
The second journey was from Tel-Arzuḫina to Dûr-sisite.
The third journey was from Dûr-sisite to Maturaba, from
Maturaba to Dûr-Taliti. The fourth journey was from
Dûr-Taliti to Babiti, from Babiti to Lagabgalagi. The fifth
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
journey was from Lagabgalagi to the river Radânu, thence
to Asri. The sixth journey was from Asri to Arrakdi.
The seventh journey was from Ḥualsundi to Napigi, thence
to Dûr-Ashur. Here we get the whole distance from Arrakdi
to Dûr-Ashur as <hi rend='italic'>two kaspu, twenty-four uš, twenty-four
u</hi>. The identification of these places would be of enormous
value for a determination of the Assyrian measures of
length. The distances are correct to the cubit. The eighth
journey was from Dûr-Ashur to Tarzini, thence to Banbala.
The ninth journey was from Banbala to Ishdi-dagurrai,
thence to Gupni-Bêl-Ḥarrân, <hi rend='italic'>one kaspu, five uš, fifty-four u</hi>.
The tenth journey was from Gupni-Bêl-Ḥarrân to Dûr-Adadi-rîmâni,
thence to Dûr-Tukulti-apil-esharra, on the
seventeenth. Several of these places are already known.
Others may be identified with some certainty. The whole
would have a great value if preserved complete.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>X. Letters Of The Second Babylonian Empire</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Business letters</note>
Some Babylonian letters of the Second Empire are to be
found in the great collections published by Strassmaier.
For the most part they are of a business nature, asking for
some payment to be made or some object sent on.
</p>

<p>
Thus,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 574.</note> one reads:
</p>

<note place='margin'>Order for seed</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Note from Nabû-shum-lîshir to Bêl-uballiṭ and Ki ...
my brothers. Bêl and Nabû decree the well-being of my brothers.
Two <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi> of dates to Bêl-nâṣir, two <hi rend='italic'>GUR</hi>
to Shamash-pir'-uṣur, from
the store for seed let my brothers give. Adar the ninth, year
eleven, Nabonidus, King of Babylon.
</quote>

<p>
Or,<note place='foot'>Nbd. 1134.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Another for supplies</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Note from Shamash-erba to Ḥâr-ibnî, my brother: When I send
Shamash-uballiṭ to thy presence, do thou send ninety <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of meal
by his hand. Verily thou knowest. Besides the twelve <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of meal
before is this. Adar the thirteenth.
</quote>

<p>
A somewhat longer but imperfect letter<note place='foot'>Nbk. 460.</note> reads:
</p>

<note place='margin'>Explanation of the filling of an order</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Note of Nadinu to the priest of Sippara, my brother: Verily,
peace be with thee. To my brother, may Bêl and Nabû decree the well-being
of my brother. When to my brother I [send], to the presence
of my lord.... Thou, my lord, knowest why seeds for the
<foreign rend='italic'>kêpu</foreign> of Raḫza I sent, and money for
the seeds I gave him. He received
it. Let me hear news and the welfare of my brother.
</quote>

<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>

<p>
Of some interest for the nature of public works is:<note place='foot'>Cyr. 207.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Note from Shâpik-zêr to Ḥâr-ibnî, my brother: The gods decree
thy well-being. Give ninety-six <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of meal to the men who are
digging the canal. Kislîmnu, the twentieth, fifth year, Cyrus, King
of Babylon, king of lands.
</quote>

<p>
Or this:<note place='foot'>Cyr. 209.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Requisition for supplies for canal digging</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Note from the priests to Ḥâr-ibnî, our brother: The gods decree
thy welfare. Give thirty-six <hi rend='italic'>ḲA</hi> of meal to Ardi-Ḥâr, for the king's
men who dig the canal. Kislîmnu the twenty-fifth, year five, Cyrus,
King of Babylon, king of lands.
</quote>

<p>
The following is another of the best-preserved letters of
this period:<note place='foot'>Cyr. 376.</note>
</p>

<note place='margin'>Request for some money</note>
<quote rend='display'>
Note from Nêrgal-aḫ-iddin to Iddin-Marduk, my father: Bêl and
Nabû decree the health and well-being of my father. Concerning
the money my father sent; the money is little, which has been given
for dates. Two minas of silver is needed. Let my father send it.
Concerning that (?), as it is good to thee. I have none. See, Nabû-mattûa
I have sent to my father. The governor has gone to
Babylon. As long as he is not here (?) at his side, he demands.
Let me hear news of my father. Whether it be corn or whether it
be anything that is with me, I will give to my father. Thy word
is indisputable with me.
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fragmentary notes</note>
For the most part the others are fragmentary and of no
special interest. It is noteworthy that they all begin with
much the same form of greeting.
</p>

<p>
Dr. T. G. Pinches published the text of three letters of
this period in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil des Travaux</hi>.<note place='foot'>XIX.,
p. 104 f.</note> Two are very fragmentary;
the third reads thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Note from Suḳâ to Bêl-zêr-ibnî, my father: May Bêl and Nabû
decree health and wealth to my father. Now I am going without
the ass. Give the ass to Shamash-eṭir; let him send it. Give him
the clothes (?).
</quote>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<p>
Here is an interesting letter:<note place='foot'>Peek-Pinches, No. 22.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Note from Daian-bêl-uṣur to Shirḳu, my lord: Every day I pray
to Bêl and Nabû for the health of my lord's life. Concerning the
lambs, which my lord sent, Bêl and Nabû know that there is a lamb
from before thee. I have set the crop and fixed the stable. I have
seen thy servant with the sheep; send thy servant with the lambs,
and direct that one lamb from among them be offered as a gift to
Nabû. I have not turned so much as one sheep into money. On
the twentieth I worked [or sacrificed] for Shamash. I saw fifty-six.
From his hands I sent twenty head to my lord. The garlic which
the governor received from my lord, the owners of the field, when
they came, took possession of; the governor of fields sold it for
money. I am deprived of the yoke of the harrow (?). As to what
my lord said to me, saying, <q>Wherefore hast thou not sent a messenger
and measured out the crop?</q> Forthwith (?) I will send to
thee, let a messenger of thy appointing (?) take it and keep it.
</quote>

<p>
Several words in this text are not found elsewhere, but
very strangely we know much about the persons. Shirḳu,
whose other name was Marduk-nâṣir-aplu, son of Iddinâ,
was of the important commercial house of Egibi, and lived
in the reign of Darius. He was a great ship-owner, and had
the tolls of a certain bridge. He travelled to Elam in the
fifth year of Darius. A great many of his business transactions
are detailed by Dr. Pinches.<note place='foot'>Peek-Pinches, pp.
85 ff.</note> Daian-bêl-uṣur and
his wife Nanâ-bêl-uṣri were slaves of Shirḳu, who pledged
them with their six children, at one time. In the sixteenth
year of Darius their master gave them as part of her dowry,
to Amat-Bau, daughter of Kalbâ. They lived in the town
of Suppatum.
</p>

<p>
The reader has now before him a few specimens of this
extremely valuable but very obscure class of literature. As
time and study avail to clear up the obscurities, much more
will be learned of the life and customs of these ancient peoples.
Enough may have been given to stimulate research,
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
and interest a wider circle of readers. It is the writer's
hope that many may be led, even by these scattered and
disjointed specimens, to undertake such studies as may
render more perfect his slight contribution and rescue from
oblivion the heroes of a bygone civilization.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='I. The Prologue And Epilogue To The Code Of Hammurabi'/>
<head>I. The Prologue And Epilogue To The Code Of Ḥammurabi</head>

<p>
The prologue and epilogue of the Code are very difficult to translate.
Often the phrases are simply stock expressions which occur in
most of the royal inscriptions. The meanings of many of these have
degenerated to mere titles of courtesy and their original significance
is obscure. But early translators found no difficulty in guessing the
most complimentary things to say, and more recent scholars in their
efforts to be exact become grotesque. When an ancient king called
himself a <q>rabid buffalo</q> it doubtless gave him satisfaction, but it
would be very rude for us to do so. On the other hand, it is very
tiresome to an English reader to read a sentence of three hundred
lines in length before coming to a principal verb. Such a sentence,
a string of epithets and participles, is here broken up into short
clauses and the participles turned into finite verbs. This is done,
not because the translator is entirely ignorant of grammar, but in
pity for the reader. This further necessitates turning the third person
singular, in which the king speaks of himself, like a modern
acceptance of an invitation to dinner, into the more simple direct
narration in the first person. Anyone who wishes to compare this
translation with the original will please recall that this is done for
ease in understanding, not because the original was misunderstood.
</p>

<p>
A more serious difficulty is, that, as it was customary to apply the
same honorific titles to both a god and the king, it is often uncertain
to which the original meant to apply them. This may have been left
intentionally vague. Some translators have taken on themselves to
settle to which they will refer the epithet, to the god or to the king.
Such translations are only interesting as a record of private opinions.
They settle nothing, do not even give a presumption in favor of
anything. It is more honest to leave the translation as vague as the
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
original, when this can be done. This part of the stele is full of
rare words, or what is just as bad, words which invariably occur in
the same context. If a king calls himself by some strange honorific
title, it is no assistance to understanding the meaning of it that a
score of successors should do the same. Of many words, all we can
conjecture is that the king was honored by them. There is nothing to
indicate what they really meant. In some cases <q>mighty</q> is as
likely to be correct as <q>wise.</q> There is no reason why we should
prefer either rendering. Both can hardly be right, neither may
really be. Some king may once have prided himself on being an
expert potter, as a modern monarch might on being a photographer.
If he called himself on a monument a <q>superb potter,</q> all his successors
would keep the title, though they never made a pot in their
lives. We have only to peruse the titles of modern monarchs to be
sure of the fact. It is, therefore, to be hoped that no one will build
any far-reaching theories upon logical deductions from the translations
given here or elsewhere of such honorific titles.
</p>

<p>
Prologue To The Code Of Ḥammurabi
</p>

<p>
When the most high God (Anu), king of the spirits of heaven
(Anunnaki), (and) Bêl, lord of heaven and earth, who settles the fates of
all, allotted to Marduk, the first-born of Ea, the lord God of right,
a rule over men and extolled him among the spirits of earth (Igigi),
then they nominated for Babylon a name above all, they made it
renowned in all quarters, and in the midst of it they founded an
everlasting sovereignty, whose seat is established like heaven and
earth; then did God (Anu) and Bêl call me by name, Ḥammurabi,
the high prince, god-fearing, to exemplify justice in the land, to banish
the proud and oppressor, that the great should not despoil the
weak, to rise like the sun over the black-headed race (mankind) and
illumine the land, to give health to all flesh. Ḥammurabi the (good)
shepherd, the choice of Bêl, am I, the completer of plenty and
abundance, the fulfiller of every purpose. For Nippur, and Dûrili
(epithet of Nippur or part of it?), I highly adorned Ê-KUR (the
temple of Bêl there). In powerful sovereignty I restored Eridu and
cleansed Ê-ZU-AB (temple of Ea there). By onslaughts on every
side (the four quarters) I magnified the name of Babylon and rejoiced
the heart of Marduk my lord. Every day I stood in Ê-SAG-GIL
(the temple of Marduk at Babylon). Descendant of kings whom
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
Sin had begotten, I enriched the city of Ur, and humbly adoring, was
a source of abundance to Ê-NER-NU-GAL (the temple of Sin at Ur).
A king of knowledge, instructed by Shamash the judge, I strongly
established Sippara, reclothed the rear of the shrine of Aya (the
consort of Shamash), and planned out Ê-BAB-BAR (temple of Shamash
at Sippara) like a dwelling in heaven. In arms I avenged Larsa
(held by the Elamite, Rim-Sin), and restored Ê-BAB-BAR (temple of
Shamash at Larsa) for Shamash my helper. As overlord I gave
fresh life to Erech, furnishing abundance of water to its people, and
completed the spire of Ê-AN-NA (temple of Nanâ at Erech). I completed
the glory of Anu and Ninni. As a protector of my land, I
reassembled the scattered people of Nisin (recently reconquered from
the Elamites) and replenished the treasury of Ê-GAL-MAḤ (temple
of Nisin). As the royal potentate of the city and own brother of
its god Zamama, I enlarged the palace at Kish and surrounded with
splendor Ê-ME-TE-UR-SAG (the temple at Kish). I made secure the
great shrine of Ninni. I ordered the temple of Ḥarsagkalama
Ê-KI-SAL-nakiri, by whose assistance I attained my desire. I restored
Kutha and increased everything at Ê-SID-LAM (the temple there).
Like a charging bull, I bore down my enemies. Beloved of TU-TU (a
name of Marduk) in my love for Borsippa, of high purpose untiring, I
cared for Ê-ZI-DA (temple of Nabû there). As a god, king of the
city, knowing and farseeing, I looked to the plantations of Dilbat and
constructed its granaries for IB (the god of Dilbat) the powerful, the
lord of the insignia, the sceptre and crown, with which he invested
me. As the beloved of MA-MA (consort of IB), I set fast the bas-reliefs
at Kish and renewed the holy meals for Erishtu (goddess of
Kish). With foresight and power I ordered the pasturages and
watering-places for Sirpurla and Girsu and arranged the extensive
offerings in Ê-50 (the temple of <q>the fifty</q> at Sirpurla). I scattered
my enemies. As the favorite of Telitim (a god), I fulfilled the
oracles of Ḥallab and rejoiced the heart of GIS-DAR (its goddess).
Grand prince, whose prayers Adad knows well, I soothed the heart of
Adad, the warrior in Bît Karkara. I fastened the ornaments in Ê-UD-GAL-GAL
(temple there). As a king who gave life to Adab, I repaired
Ê-MAḤ (temple at Adab). As hero and king of the city,
unrivalled combatant, I gave life to Mashkan-Shabri and poured
forth abundance on SIT-LAM (temple of Nêrgal there). The wise,
the restorer, who had conquered the whole of the rebellious, I rescued
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
the people of Malkâ in trouble. I strengthened their abodes
with every comfort. For Ea and DAM-GAL-NUN-NA I increased
their rule and in perpetuity appointed the lustrous offerings. As a
leader and king of the city, I made the settlements on the Euphrates
to be populous. As client of Dagan, who begat me, I avenged the
people of Mera and Tutul. As high prince, I made the face of
Ninni to shine, making the lustrous meals of NIN-A-ZU secure. I
reunited my people in famine by assuring their allowances within
Babylon in peace and security. As the shepherd of my people, a
servant whose deeds were acceptable to GIS-DAR in E-UL-MASH (temple
of Anunit) in the midst of Agade, noted for its wide squares, I settled
the rules and set straight the Tigris. I brought back to Asshur the
gracious colossus and settled the altar (?). As king of Nineveh I
made the waters of Ninni to shine in Ê-DUP-DUP. High of purpose
and wise in achievement for the great gods, descendant of Sumu-lâil,
eldest son of Sin-muballiṭ, long descended scion of royalty, great
king, a very Shamash (or sun) of Babylon, I caused light to arise
upon Sumer and Akkad. A king who commanded obedience in all
the four quarters, beloved of Ninni am I. When Marduk brought
me to direct all people and commissioned me to give judgment, I laid
down justice and right in the provinces, I made all flesh to prosper.
Then&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>the words of the Code are the completion of the sentence.
The king implies that its regulations were the outcome of this legislative
decision</hi>).
</p>

<p>
The Epilogue
</p>

<p>
The judgments of righteousness which Ḥammurabi, the powerful
king, settled, and caused the land to receive a sure polity and a
gracious rule.
</p>

<p>
I am Ḥammurabi, the superb king. Marduk gave me to shepherd
the black-headed race, whom Bêl had assigned me. I did not
forget, I did not neglect, I found for them safe pastures, I opened
the way through sharp rocks, and gave them guidance. With the
powerful weapon that Zamama and Ishtar granted me, by the foresight
with which Ea endowed me, with the power that Marduk gave
me, I cut off the enemy above and below, I lorded it over the
conquered. The flesh of the land I made to rejoice. I extended
the dwellings of the people in security. I left them no cause to
fear. The great gods chose me and I am the shepherd that gives
peace, whose club is straight; of evil and good in my city I was the
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
director. I carried all the people of Sumer and Akkad in my
bosom. By my protection, I guided in peace its brothers. By my
wisdom, I provided for them. That the great should not oppress
the weak, to counsel the widow and orphan, in Babylon, the city of
Anu and Bêl, I raised up its head (the stele's) in Ê-SAG-GIL (temple
of Marduk there), the temple whose foundation is firm as the heaven
and earth. To judge the judgment of the land, to decide the decisions
of the land, to succor the injured, I wrote on my stele the
precious words and placed them before my likeness, that of a righteous
king. The king that is gentle, king of the city, exalted am I.
My words are precious, my power has no rival. By the order of
Shamash, the judge supreme, of heaven and earth, that judgment
may shine in the land; by the permission of Marduk, my lord, I
set up a bas-relief, to preserve my likeness in Ê-SAG-GIL that I love,
to commemorate my name forever in gratitude. The oppressed who
has a suit to prosecute may come before my image, that of a righteous
king, and read my inscription and understand my precious
words and may my stele elucidate his case. Let him see the law he
seeks and may he draw in his breath and say: <q>This Ḥammurabi
was a ruler who was to his people like the father that begot them.
He obeyed the order of Marduk his lord, he followed the commands
of Marduk above and below. He delighted the heart of Marduk
his lord, and granted happy life to his people forever. He guided
the land.</q> Let him recite the document. Before Marduk, my lord,
and Ṣarpanitum, my lady, with full heart let him draw near. The
colossus and the gods that live in Ê-SAG-GIL, or the courts of
Ê-SAG-GIL, let him bless every day before Marduk, my lord, and Ṣarpanitum,
my lady.
</p>

<p>
In the future, in days to come, at any time, let the king who is
in the land, guard the words of righteousness which I have written
on my stele. Let him not alter the judgment of the land which I
judged nor the decisions I decided. Let him not destroy my bas-relief.
If that man has wisdom and is capable of directing his land,
let him attend to the words which I have written upon my stele, let
him apprehend the path, the rule, the law of the land which I judged,
and the decision I decided for the land, and so let him guide forward
the black-headed race; let him judge their judgment and decide
their decision, let him cut off from his land the proud and violent,
let him rejoice the flesh of his people. Ḥammurabi, the king of
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
righteousness, to whom Shamash has granted rights, am I. My
words are precious, my deeds have no rival. Above and below I
am the whirlwind that scours the deep and the height. If that
man has hearkened to my words which I have written on my stele
and has not frustrated justice, has not altered my words, has
not injured my bas-reliefs, may Shamash make lasting his sceptre;
like me, as a king of righteousness, let him guide his people in
justice.
</p>

<p>
But if that man does not hearken to my words which I wrote on
my stele, forgets my curses, fears not the malediction of God, sets
aside the judgment which I judged, alters my words and destroys
my bas-reliefs, effaces my inscribed name and writes in his own
name; or, for fear of these curses has charged another to do so; that
man, be he king, lord, patêsi, or noble, whose name is ever so renowned,
may the great god (Anu), the father of gods, who named
my reign, turn him back, shatter his sceptre in pieces, curse his fortunes;
may Bêl the lord who fixes the fates, whose command is not
set aside, who extended my sovereignty, cause for him an endless revolt,
an impulse to fly from his home, and set for his fortune a reign
of sighs, short days, years of want, darkness that has no ray of light
and a death in the sight of all men. May he decree with his heavy
curse the ruin of his city, the scattering of his people, the removal
of his sovereignty, the disappearance of his name and his race from
the land. May Beltu, the great mother, whose command is weighty
in Ê-KUR, the lady who made my plans prosperous, make his words
in the matter of justice and law to be hateful before Bêl. May she
bring about the downfall of his country, the loss of his people, the
efflux of his life like water, by the order of the Bêl, the king. May
Ea, the grand prince, whose destiny takes premier rank, the messenger
of the gods, who knows all, who has prolonged my life, distort
his understanding and intellect, curse him with forgetfulness, dam up
his rivers at their source. In his land may Ashnan (the deity of
wheat), the life of the people, not grow. May Shamash, great judge
of heaven and earth, who governs the creatures of life, the lord of
help, cut off his sovereignty; judge not his judgment; carry away
his path; annihilate the march of his armies; cast an evil look upon
him to uproot his rule, and fix for him the loss of his land. May
the evil sentence of Shamash quickly overwhelm him; deprive him
of life among the living above; and below in the earth, deprive his
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
ghost of water. May Sin, the lord of the sky, the god who creates,
whose ray is splendid among the gods, deprive him of crown and
throne of kinship; surround him with a great shirt of pain, a heavy
penalty, that will not leave his body, and make him finish his days,
month by month, through the years of his reign, in tears and sighs.
May he multiply for him the burden of royalty. May he grant him
as his lot a life that can only be likened to death. May Adad, lord
of abundance, great bull of the sky, and the earth, my helper, withdraw
the rain from the heavens, the floods from the springs; destroy
his land with hunger and want; thunder in wrath over his city, and
turn his land to deluge mounds. May Zamama, great warrior, first
born of <hi rend='italic'>Ê-KUR</hi>, who goes at my right hand on the battlefield,
shatter his weapon and turn for him day into night. May he place his
enemy over him. May Ishtar, the lady of conflict and battle, who
prospered my arms, my gracious protector, who loved my reign, in
her heart of rage, her boundless fury, curse his sovereignty; turn all
his mercies to curses, shatter his weapon in conflict and battle, appoint
him trouble and sedition, strike down his heroes, and make
the earth drink of their blood, scatter the plain with heaps of the
carcasses of his troops, grant them no burial; deliver himself into the
hands of his enemy, cause him to be carried in chains to the enemy's
land. May Nêrgal, the powerful one of the gods, who meets with
no rival, who caused me to obtain my triumphs, burn up his people
with a fever like a great fire among the reeds. With his powerful
weapon may he drink him up, with his fevers crush him like a statue
of clay. May Erishtu, the exalted lady of all lands, the creator-mother,
carry off his son and leave him no name. May he not beget
a seed of posterity among his people. May Nin-karrak, the daughter
of Anu, the completer of my mercies in <hi rend='italic'>Ê-KUR</hi>, award him a
severe malady, a grievous illness, a painful wound, which cannot be
healed, of which the physician knows not the origin, which cannot
be soothed by the bandage; and rack him with palsy, until she has
mastered his life; may she weaken his strength. May the great
gods of heaven and earth, the Anunnaki, in their assembly, who
look after the halls and the courts of this Ê-bar-ra (temple of
Shamash at Sippara, where the stele was clearly set up), curse with
a bitter curse his dynasty, his land, his soldiers, his people, and his
subjects. May the judgments of Bêl, which in his mouth are irrevocable,
curse him and quickly overcome him.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Chronology</head>

<p>
The following tables make no pretence to finality. In Babylonian
history no date before <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 747 can be considered absolutely
fixed. In Assyrian history the Eponym Canon certainly goes back to
about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 893. Then scattered notices in later writers enable
us to approximate to earlier dates and the varied synchronisms between
Assyrian and Babylonian kings render the dates probable, as far
back as the First Dynasty of Babylon. There is only one fixed date
before that, the period of Sargon I., which depends on a statement
of Nabonidus.
</p>

<p>
The sequence of monarchs is, however, very probably correct. As
knowledge increases, more names will be added to fill up the gaps,
and dated documents will give the lengths of the reigns. A discussion
of the grounds for the dates cannot be given here. The reader
may refer to Dr. P. Rost, in the <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Vorderasiatischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, 1897, No. 2, and <hi rend='italic'>Orientalistische
Litteratur-Zeitung</hi>, 1900, pp. 143, 175, 212. Radau's
<hi rend='italic'>Early Babylonian History</hi> may
be consulted for the earliest dates.
</p>

<p>
In the early periods, a vertical line between two names denotes
that the second was son of the former. This is often all we know,
but it is useful to mark the fact, as we cannot then insert other
rulers between them. Names printed in capitals are either Sumerian
or their true pronunciation is unknown. When these capitals are
in Roman type, we know that they were kings or Patesis; when they
are printed in italic, we only know that they were the parents of
those whose names follow. We do not then know whether they
reigned or not.
</p>

<p>
For Assyrian chronology, see <hi rend='italic'>Annals of the Kings of Assyria</hi>, by
Budge and King, 1902.
</p>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<p>
Assyria
</p>

<p>
Early Patesis, Dates Conjectural, Order Uncertain
</p>

<lg>
<l>Ushpia,</l>
<l>Ilushuma,</l>
<l>|</l>
<l>Irishum, <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 2100</l>
<l>|</l>
<l>Ikunum,</l>
<l>Ishme-Dagan, <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1930</l>
<l>|</l>
<l>Shamshi-Adad I., <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 1910</l>
<l>Igur-kapkapu,</l>
<l>|</l>
<l>Shamshi-Adad II.,</l>
<l>Bêl-upaḫḫir (?),</l>
<l>|</l>
<l>Shamshi-Adad III.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Early Kings, Dates Conjectural
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Bêl-ibni,</l>
<l>Sulili (?),</l>
<l>Bêl-kapkapu,      1700</l>
<l>Ashur-bêl-nishêshu,      1500</l>
<l>Puzur-Ashur,      1470</l>
<l>Ashur-nâdin-aḫê,      1430</l>
<l>Ashur-uballiṭ, son,      1420</l>
<l>Bêl-nirari, son,      1400</l>
<l>Pudi-ilu, son,      1397</l>
<l>Adad-nirari I., son,      1395</l>
<l>Shulmanu-asharid (Shalmaneser) I., son,      1380</l>
<l>Tukulti-Ninip I., son,      1340</l>
<l>Ashur-nâṣir-pal I.,      1330</l>
<l>Ashur-narara,      1300</l>
<l>Nabû-daian,      1295</l>
<l>Bêl-kudur-uṣur,      1290</l>
<l>Ninip-apil-esharra,      1285</l>
<l>Ashur-dan, son,      1260</l>
<l>Mutakkil-Nusku, son,      1250</l>
<l>Ashur-rêsh-ishi, son,      1220</l>
<l>Tukulti-apil-esharra (Tiglath-pileser) I., son,      1200</l>
<l>Ashur-bêl-kala, son,      1090</l>
<l>Shamshi-Adad IV., brother,      1080</l>
<l>Ashur-nâṣir-pal II.,      1050</l>
<l>Erba-Adad (?),</l>
<l>Ashur-nâdin-aḫê,</l>
<l>Ashur-erbi,</l>
<l>Tukulti-apil-esharra (Tiglath-pileser) II.,      950</l>
<l>Ashur-dan II., son,      930</l>
<l>Adad-nirari II., son,      911</l>
</lg>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<p>
Dates Certain From Eponym Canon
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'><hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></l>
<l>Tukulti-Ninip II., son,      890</l>
<l>Ashur-nâṣir-pal III., son,      884</l>
<l>Shulmanu-asharid (Shalmaneser) II.,      859</l>
<l>Shamshi-Adad V.,      824</l>
<l>Adad-nirari III.,      811</l>
<l>Shulmanu-asharid (Shalmaneser) III.,      782</l>
<l>Ashur-dan III.,      772</l>
<l>Ashur-nirari II.,      754</l>
<l>Tukulti-apil-esharra (Tiglath-pileser, Pul) III.,      745</l>
<l>Shulmanu-asharid (Shalmaneser) IV.,      726</l>
<l>Sharru-ukin (Sargon) II.,      721</l>
<l>Sin-aḫê-erba (Sennacherib), son,      704</l>
<l>Ashur-aḫ-iddin (Esarhaddon), son,      680</l>
<l>Ashur-bâni-pal (Asnapper), son,      668</l>
<l>Ashur-etil-ilâni, son,      625</l>
<l>Sin-shum-lîshir,      (?)</l>
<l>Sin-shar-ishkun,      (?)</l>
<l>Fall of Nineveh,      607</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Weights And Measures</head>

<p>
I. Weights
</p>

<lg>
<l>1 shekel = 180 <hi rend='italic'>šê</hi>.</l>
<l>1 mina = 60 shekels.</l>
<l>1 talent = 60 minas.</l>
</lg>

<p>
The weight of the mina may be reckoned in round numbers as 500
grams.
</p>

<p>
II. Measures Of Capacity
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Early Scale</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1 GIN = 180 <hi rend='italic'>šê</hi> (?).</l>
<l>1 ḲA = 60 GIN.</l>
<l>1 GUR = 300 ḲA.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Later Scale</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1 GUR = 180 ḲA.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<p>
III. Measures Of Length
</p>

<lg>
<l>1 ell (U)        = 60 <hi rend='italic'>ubanu</hi>.</l>
<l>1 <hi rend='italic'>ḳânu</hi> = 6 ells.</l>
<l>1 GAR            = 2 <hi rend='italic'>ḳânu</hi>.</l>
<l>1 KASBU          = 1,800 GAR.</l>
</lg>

<p>
On other measures see A. D. D., ii., pp. 197-218. The ell is
about half a metre.
</p>

<p>
IV. Measures Of Surface
</p>

<lg>
<l>1 GIN = 180 <hi rend='italic'>šê.</hi></l>
<l>1 SAR = 60 GIN.</l>
<l>1 GAN = 1,800 SAR.</l>
</lg>

<p>
The area of the SAR was one GAR square, or 6 metres square.
Areas were also measured by the amount of corn required to sow
them, or their average yield, that is by the GUR and ḲA.
</p>

<p>
V. Measures Of Time
</p>

<lg>
<l>1 day   = 12 double hours.</l>
<l>1 month = 30 days, average.</l>
<l>1 year  = 12 months, average.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Further details may be obtained from Zimmern's <hi rend='italic'>Das Princip
unserer Zeit-und Raumteilung</hi>, in the <hi rend='italic'>Berichten d. philolog. histor.
Classe d. Königl. Sächs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig</hi>.
November 14, 1901.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Bibliography Of The Later Periods</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The New Babylonian Empire</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Nabopolassar.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published nineteen texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iv., pp. 141-45, of which three are transcribed and
translated in <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 177-81. Dr. Pinches gave another,
<hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, iv., p.
14, and another in Peek-Pinches, p. 3. Dr. Moldenke gave nine
other texts in his <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts from the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Nebuchadrezzar II.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published 460 texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Hefts V.-VI.</hi>, of the <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte</hi>,
of which thirty-one are transcribed
and translated in <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 180-201, and forty are
discussed in Kohler-Peiser's <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi>. Two
texts are published by Pinches, <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, iv., p. 38, two more in
Peiser's <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Verträge</hi>, six texts from the Liverpool
Museum were published by Strassmaier in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès
Internationale des Orientalistes, 1883</hi>. Some of the above texts belong, however,
to the reign of Nebuchadrezzar III.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Evil-Merodach.</hi>&mdash;Evetts published twenty-four texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische
Texte, Heft VI., B</hi>, of which <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 200-3, gives
transcriptions and translations of two. Kohler-Peiser discuss eight
in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi> and add one more. Strassmaier
published two from the Liverpool Museum in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès
Internationale des Orientalistes, 1883</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Neriglissar.</hi>&mdash;Evetts published seventy-two texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte, Heft VI., B</hi>, pp. 25-82. Of these four are
transcribed and translated in <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 202-7 and
Kohler-Peiser discussed fourteen in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi>.
In <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Verträge</hi>, Peiser published another; and
Strassmaier published three from the Liverpool Museum in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes
du VI. Congrès Internationale des Orientalistes, 1883</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Laborosoarchod.</hi>&mdash;Evetts published six texts,
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte, Heft VI., B</hi>, pp. 85-90. Of these, one is
transcribed and translated in <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 206-7. Strassmaier
published four in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VIII. Congrès Internationale
des Orientalistes, 1889</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Nabonidus.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published 1134 texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische
Texte, Heft I.-IV.</hi> Of these, <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 206-59, gives
transcriptions and translations of fifty-six, and three fresh texts from
copies by Peiser, Pinches, and Revillout. Kohler-Peiser discuss sixty-five
of them in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi> and add one more.
Pinches published two, <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, iv., pp. 30-41, and four in
Peek-Pinches. Dr. Peiser gave another in <hi rend='italic'>Keilschriftliche
Acten-Stücke</hi>, No. 3, two from the British Museum. Strassmaier published six
from the Liverpool Museum in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès Internationale
des Orientalistes, 1883</hi>. Dr. Moldenke gave forty-two texts
in his <hi rend='italic'>Cuneiform Texts in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
York</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Persian Period</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Cyrus.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published 384 texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte, Heft VII.</hi>, of which <hi rend='italic'>K.
B.</hi>, iv., pp. 253-85 gives transcriptions
and translations of twenty-four, and Kohler-Peiser discussed thirty-four
in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi>, adding four new texts. In
<hi rend='italic'>Keilschriftliche Acten-Stücke</hi>, Peiser gave two more; in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische
Verträge</hi>, fourteen more. Strassmaier gave two from the Liverpool
Museum, in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès Internationale des Orientalistes,
1883</hi>. Pinches published another in Peek-Pinches, Dr. Budge another
in <hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, vii., p. 219.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Cambyses.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier gave 441 texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte,
Heft VIII.-IX.</hi>, but in these no distinction is made between the
reigns of Cambyses and Cyrus, Cambyses alone, Cyrus alone. <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>,
iv., pp. 260-63 gives transcription and translation of four, followed
by twenty-five of Cambyses alone and fourteen of Cyrus
alone. Kohler-Peiser discussed twenty-one in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonische
Rechtsleben</hi>. Peiser gave seventeen more in <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische
Verträge</hi> from the Berlin Museum and one from the British Museum. Strassmaier
gave three from the Liverpool Museum, and one in possession
of Golenischeff in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès Internationale des
Orientalistes</hi>. Pinches published one in <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, iv., one in
Peek-Pinches. Dr. G. A. Barton published two in the <hi rend='italic'>American Journal
of Semitic Languages, January, 1900</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Barzia.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published nine texts,
<hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iv., pp. 147 ff., of which four are transcribed
and translated, <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 294-98.
Peiser gave three more in <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Verträge</hi>. Strassmaier
published one from the Liverpool Museum in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès
Internationale des Orientalistes, 1883</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Nebuchadrezzar III.</hi>&mdash;In <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp.
298-303, three are transcribed and translated from those published above and ascribed
to Nebuchadrezzar II.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Darius.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier has published 579 texts in
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte, Heft X.-XII.</hi>, of which
<hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 302-11 gives transcription
and translation of nine. Kohler-Peiser discuss ninety-six
in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi> and add seven more. Pinches
published six in <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, ii., p. 2; iv., pp. 21, 32, 41, 43,
44; and twelve in Peek-Pinches. Peiser gave fifteen in
<hi rend='italic'>Keilschriftliche Acten-Stücke</hi>,
and fifty-five in <hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Verträge</hi> from the Berlin Museum,
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
twenty-four from the British Museum. Dr. G. A. Barton gave
twenty-seven in <hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Semitic Languages, January,
1900</hi>. Strassmaier gave six from the Liverpool Museum in the
<hi rend='italic'>Actes du VI. Congrès Internationale des Orientalistes, 1883</hi>. Dr.
Budge published three in <hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., pp. 216 ff.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Shamash-erba.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published one text of this period
in <hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., p. 157 f.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Xerxes.</hi>&mdash;Evetts published four texts,
<hi rend='italic'>Babylonische Texte, Heft VI., B</hi>, pp. 91-94; of these
<hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 310-11 gives transcription
and translation of one. Pinches published one, <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, iv., p. 34,
Dr. G. A. Barton gave one in <hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Semitic Languages,
January, 1900</hi>. Strassmaier published seven in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes
du VIII. Congrès Internationale des Orientalistes, 1889</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Artaxerxes.</hi>&mdash;Professor Hilprecht and Dr. Clay have published
119 texts with transcriptions and translations of twelve, in the ninth
volume of the series of Cuneiform Texts of the collections of the University
of Philadelphia. Kotalla has given transcriptions and translations
of others in <hi rend='italic'>B. A. S.</hi>, iv. Dr. Peiser gave a transcription
and translation of one from his own copy, <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 312-13.
Kohler-Peiser give two more in <hi rend='italic'>Aus Babylonischen Rechtsleben</hi>. Dr.
G. A. Barton gave four in <hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Semitic Languages,
January, 1900</hi>. Strassmaier published nine in the <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VIII.
Congrès Internationale des Orientalistes, 1889</hi>, and one in
<hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., p. 158.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Macedonian Period</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Alexander IV.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier, <hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>,
iii., p. 150, transcribed and translated one, also <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>,
iv., pp. 312-13. Pinches gave one, <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>,
iv., p. 39.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Seleucus II.</hi>&mdash;Oppert, <hi rend='italic'>Doc. Jur.</hi>, pp.
301 ff., gave two, one given again, <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 312-17.
Pinches gave another, <hi rend='italic'>C. T.</hi>, iv., p. 29.
Strassmaier published one in <hi rend='italic'>Actes du VIII. Congrès Internationale
des Orientalistes, 1889</hi>; and one, <hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., p. 152 f.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Demetrius.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published two,
<hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., pp. 148-50.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Antiochus III.</hi>&mdash;Strassmaier published one,
<hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., p. 150 f., transcribed and translated also,
<hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv., pp. 316-17.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arsacide Period</hi>
</p>

<p>
Strassmaier published sixteen texts, <hi rend='italic'>Z. A.</hi>, iii., pp. 143 ff.,
one is given in transcription and translation, <hi rend='italic'>K. B.</hi>, iv.,
pp. 318-19.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<p>
Superior Roman numerals refer to sections of the early Babylonian laws, superior arabic
numerals to the laws of the Code of Ḥammurabi, and superior capitals to the later
Assyrian or Babylonian laws.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Abatements:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for loss of crop, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for loss of interest, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abêshu', letters of, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accidental loss:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by drought, etc., payment postponed, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by storm or rain falls on tenant, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shared by tenant and owner if rent unpaid, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accounts and business documents:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account books, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acknowledgment of advances, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>amounts of food-stuffs, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Assyrian lists, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conditions of service with flock and herds, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>herdsman's, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its obscurity, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iron articles, mention of, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leather, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receipts for loans, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>records of measurements, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repairs and expenses, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep-shearing, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>skins, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>steward's accounts, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>weaving, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wool, memoranda regarding, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adjournment of case:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to exceed six months, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>13</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to call witnesses, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>13</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-adoption'/>
<l>Adoption:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>adoption implied inheritance, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought responsibilities to both parties, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by craftsman, who has taught him his handicraft, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>188</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>189</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>he cannot be redeemed, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>188</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but redeemable if not taught, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>189</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by deed signed and sealed, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by wealthy persons, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consent of others in the family, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duties of adopted children, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>such as service, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of adoption, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>frequency and reasons for, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if disinherited, he receives one-third of son's share before leaving, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>191</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but not field, garden, or house, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>191</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>method of procedure, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of child of unknown parents, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>186</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>who shall return to parents when known, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>186</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of royal favorite, or courtier, or votary, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>187</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>who shall not be reclaimed, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>187</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of natural son, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>185</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against suits, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punishment of adopted children, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pure and simple, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repudiation and disinheritance, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repudiation by adopted son punished, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights of adoption to be accepted, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>190</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>system considered, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adultery:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charges of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>131</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife of captive excused, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>134</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalties for, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty, strangling, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>drowning, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Advocate or pleader, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-affidavit'/>
<l>Affidavit as to cause of death, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-agent'/>
<l>Agent. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-merchant'>Merchant</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disputing with principal, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>106</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>107</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his power of attorney, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>292</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with the principal, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100-107</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if loses or unsuccessful, or robbed, repays capital, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>101-103</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must give strict account of intromissions, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>104</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must have power of attorney, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must keep accounts, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>of money received, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>of interest due, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must receive sealed acknowledgment, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>104</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pays threefold for misappropriation, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>106</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to the merchant, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agnates, their power, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agriculture, its form, duties, and risks, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alienation:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by assignments, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by business transfer, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by donations and bequests, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by gifts to votary, daughter, wife, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consent of legal heirs, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of property, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of public property forbidden, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33 sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restricted by family rights, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>

<lg>
<l>Allowances:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to divorced wife, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>usufruct to bring up the children, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alteration of bond by post-dating, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammi-ditana, letters of, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammi-zadûga, letters of, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestors:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a family bond, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target="index-family">Family</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestral:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>domain, lands subject to, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>estates, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apprentice, slave taught as, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenia, references to, in Sennacherib's letters to Sargon, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artificers of the temple, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashurbânipal:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>friendly letters of, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inquiries about oracles, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters illustrating his reign, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Esarhaddon, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of his library, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-assault'/>
<l>Assault:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal, to free-woman, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>209</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>210</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to plebeian, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>212</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to slave, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>214</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of freeman by slave, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>205</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man of higher rank, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>202</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>203</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of pregnant free-woman, causing miscarriage, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>209</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of plebeian by plebeian, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>204</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of pregnant plebeian, causing miscarriage, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>211</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of pregnant slave, causing miscarriage, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>213</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assessment of damages. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target="index-damages">Damages</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by sheep to green crop, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>57</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>to ripe crop, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>58</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for assault. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target="index-assault">Assault</ref>, <ref target="index-fines">Fines</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for failing in terms of lease, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for lack of professional skill. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target="index-surgeon">Surgeon</ref>, <ref target="index-veterinary-surgeon">Veterinary</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for neglect. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Neglect</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree cut without consent, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>59</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assignment for debt:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of all the debtor has, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>z</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of crop, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of date plantation, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>x</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife, son, or daughter, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>117</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>epochs, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>estimated proportion of slaves, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>usages regarding slaves, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attorney:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>power of, for executing a deed, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>for representative action, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>for protecting rights, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its use, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>over funds, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Average:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crop in damages, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>55</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rent in damages, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>43</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>62</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>65</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonia:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boundaries of land, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>canals, irrigation, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early postal system for letters, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>importance of studying, vii <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influence of natural features, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its epochs, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land tenure in, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lasting effects of its civilization, vii</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>law later, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names in slavery, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ownership of land, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive tenure, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proportion of slaves in the population, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>village lands, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-bailiff'/>
<l>Bailiff. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target="index-official">Official</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has charge of cropping the farm, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>52</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bailment:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from minor or slave without bond or witnesses, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>and penal equals theft, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banishment:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an ancient custom, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from the city for incest, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>154</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bank, temple the popular place of deposit, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-temple'>Temple</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beer-seller:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bound to summon slanderers and brawlers to palace, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives 60 ḲA of <hi rend='italic'>sakani</hi> beer for 50 ḲA of corn, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>111</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prosecuted and drowned, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beer-shop:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>closed against votaries, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drink to be not cheaper than corn, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed for unlawful assemblies, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>109</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regulation of, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108-110</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>votary forbidden, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benefice:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be assigned to son, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>29</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>deputed, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>27-29</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>forfeited by neglect or disuse, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not be assigned for debt, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>39</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>bequeathed, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>38</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>given for ransom, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>given in exchange, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>41</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not be bequeathed or assigned for debt, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>38</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>39</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not be given in exchange, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>41</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for its abuse or neglect, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>27-29</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>31</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>price paid for it forfeited, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>35</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>37</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or alienated, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi>; by sale, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bennu</hi>, slave disease, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>280</hi>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bequest:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>power of, restrained, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>free, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Betrothed:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrothal in early life, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>maiden in her father's house, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>130</hi>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage ceremony, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seduction of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>130</hi>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bibliography:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arsacide Period, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Macedonian Period, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New Babylonian Empire, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persian Period, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bigamy:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considered as a custom, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ignorance, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>135</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boat:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>building of, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>234</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fast, hired, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>276</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in collision, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>240</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of 60 GUR hired, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>277</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value in trading, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wreck of, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>235-238</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boatmen, carriers and builders, their duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-bond'/>
<l>Bond, written deed or contract sealed:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Assyrian, of great length, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>body of the deed uniform, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deed of house sale, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>destroyed on payment, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drawn by scribe, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for adoption, signed and sealed, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for debt, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>52</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for deed of gift to son, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>165</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for legal marriage, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>128</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for legal purchase, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for rent due, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>47</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for storage, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>122</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in marriage contract, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Sumerian or in Semitic, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interests safeguarded, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its value as a legal witness, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept how and where, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal memoranda in security, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage contracts, few met with, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage deed of gift, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>notary's fee for, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of herdsman, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>264</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often the subject in pledge, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>power of attorney for sealing, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preserved in temple archives, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>production of, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specifications of items, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>earnest-money to close the bargain, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specimen deed of sale, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to daughter of concubine, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>183</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to votary's dowry from her father, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>179</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>180</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>181</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>usually in duplicate, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>valuable for information, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with free gifts, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boundary stones, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as inviolable landmarks, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description of, in deeds, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>street named as boundary, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>usually rectangular, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-branding'/>
<l>Branding, brander, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>226</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>227</hi>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on forehead for slander, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on freeman escaped from levy-master, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or tattooing a slave, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave without owner's consent, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>226</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>227</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son's wife branded and sold, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brawling in beer-shop, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>109</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breach:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of contract by lessee, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of promise of marriage, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>159</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bribery punished, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-bride-price'/>
<l>Bride-price:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138</hi>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>159</hi>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 129</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and trousseau, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assessed at one mina of silver as price of divorce, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>139</hi>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assessed at one-third mina of silver if plebeian, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>140</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deducted from marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>166</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given back to barren wife when divorced, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ceremonial presentation, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its principle considered, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>negotiations regarding the payment, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reserved from father's estate for minor son, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>166</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retained by bride's father, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>159</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returned double, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>160</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-bronze'/>
<l>Bronze lancet, for surgical operations, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>220</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Builder, his duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>228</hi>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burglary, with death penalty, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>21</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burial vault in a house, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burning as penalty:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man and mother in incest, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>157</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thief in the same fire, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>25</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buyer must discharge duties of subject, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>40</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buying and selling, general law of, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9-12</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calling to account:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for intromissions, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108-116</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>124</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for neglect, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in divorce case, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in nursing, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in prosecution, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>265</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canals:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in trading, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>digging, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>24</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappadocian tablets, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Captives:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by enemy for ransom, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in war, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>135</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>question as to marriage relations, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>135</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caravans, their place in trading, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-carrier'/>
<l>Carrier's responsibilities, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>112</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fivefold restitution, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>112</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>

<lg>
<l>Cataract, operations for, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>220</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chedorlaomer, supposed reference to, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-children'/>
<l>Children. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-inheritance'>Inheritance</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>age of at majority, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrothed, remained in the father's house, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born of supposed widow remain with second husband, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>135</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commonly educated, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>could be preferred by father, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>165</hi>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>daughters under the father's disposing, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedicated to temple, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legitimate and illegitimate, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may receive bequest from their mother, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of different mothers share equally in their father's estate, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>167</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of different mothers share equally in their own mother's estate, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>167</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of divorced mothers, their legal rights, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of second wife take one-third of the property, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slave and free-woman provided for, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>176</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife and maid may share equally, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>170</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife or those of the maid made free, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punishment of unfilial conduct in, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>195</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of by fire, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>schools for and education of, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sold into slavery, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>status of, in the inheritance, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>170</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their childhood and early life considered, <ref target='Pg151'>151-153</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their obligations and rights, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their relation to paternal rights, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>117</hi>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under the mother at their father's death, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chronology:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Assyria, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>of the king,</q> <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>system of the tablets, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tables of, <ref target='Pg396'>396-398</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coin. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-loans'>Loans</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>current, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collision of boats, law of, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>240</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commerce, how controlled by the State, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commission, trade on, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100-105</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-agent'>Agent</ref>, <ref target='index-merchant'>Merchant</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compensation:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as granted by the court, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for eviction of tenant, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>Y</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for highway robbery, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of official, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Composition:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for bride-price, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>139</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for loss of life, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comrade:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>breaks off a marriage by calumny, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shall not marry the girl, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-concubine'/>
<l>Concubine:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divorced, free to marry, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her daughter, dowered by deed, shall not share in father's estate, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>183</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her daughter, if not dowered, shall be presented with marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>184</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if a mother and divorced, her legal rights, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if a mother, cannot be sold, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if childless, may be sold, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>147</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may receive a slave-mark, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must not rival wife, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>145</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not equal in status to votary, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144-147</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restrictions on her marriage, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144-147</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concubinage as a system, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conjugal rights, denial of, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denial of, counted equal to desertion, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liable to judicial inquiry, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contracts, old, their present value, xii <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated and paid in rent, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given on loan, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tithed to the temple, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under charge of the bailiff, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>52</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with sesame, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50-52</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corporate liability, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corvée. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-militia'>Militia</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cow in milk, on hire, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>243</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courts of law:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cases before, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of procedure, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nature and action, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalties from, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlements out of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creditor. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-merchant'>Merchant</ref>, <ref target='index-debtor'>Debtor</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot take property without owner's leave, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in marital responsibilities, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>151</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>152</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not pay himself without debtor's consent, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may sell pledged slave, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>118</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must restore all illegally taken, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi>; and forfeits his claim, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punishable for cruel treatment of hostage, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>responsible for fair treatment of hostage, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>115</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criminal law, <ref target='Pg116'>116-118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crop:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in pledge for debt, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its duties, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49-52</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kinds cultivated, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>51</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>52</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cultivation:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duties and rent, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of field described, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>43</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Custody of child in mother, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>29</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cutting down trees, assessment of damage, one-half mina of silver, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>59</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>

<lg>
<l>Damage to crops:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by cutting down trees, one-half mina of silver per tree, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>59</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by flood assessed at average crop, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>55</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assessed at 10 GUR of corn for each GAN of land, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>56</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by sheep assessed at 20 GUR of corn for each GAN of land, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>57</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>assessed at 60 GUR of corn for each GAN of land, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>58</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-damages'/>
<l>Damages due. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-fines'>Fines</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for flooding from open dike wall, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>53</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>54</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>55</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>56</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for illegal eviction, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a fine, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to deceased's relatives, one mina of silver, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>24</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of defendant, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>12</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of housebreaker, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>21</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-death-penalty'/>
<l>Death penalty:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by burning, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>157</hi>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by drowning of a woman, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by strangling, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considered as an ancient custom, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for adultery, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for alleged purchase of lost property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>10</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for allowing seditious meetings in beer-shop, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>109</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for appropriation of lost property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for buying from minor or slave, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for conniving at her husband's murder, impaling, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>152</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for dereliction of official duty, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for employing a substitute in official duty, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for harboring fugitive slaves, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>to default the forced labor, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for highway robbery, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>22</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for housebreaking, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>21</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for kidnapping a child, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>14</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for oppressing subordinates, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>34</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for perjury, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for procuring desertion of slaves, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>15</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for rape of betrothed maiden, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>130</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for receiving stolen goods, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for repudiating her husband, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for retaining captured slave, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>19</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for sacrilegious theft, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for slander and stirring up strife, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>11</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for theft and unable to pay, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for theft at a fire, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>25</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for undutifulness and slander, drowning, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>143</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for witchcraft, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on adulterers, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on builder for bad work, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>229</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on builder's son, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>230</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on votary frequenting beer-shop, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debt:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abatement for damages by storm, deluge, or drought, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>creditor to have no call for year's interest, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>debtor's obligation not lessened, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>52</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws of Mancipium, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>115-117</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>118</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>119</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>question of ante-nuptial, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>151</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>property held as security for, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-pledges'>Pledges</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-debtor'/>
<l>Debtor:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how secured against illegal process, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>illegal distraint, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>114</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may pay in kind, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>Z</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debts:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of husband and wife, mutual obligations, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>152</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>question of pre-nuptial, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>151</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decision of judge in lawsuit, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decisions, legal, considered, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dedication:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of land to temple, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>to secure divine favor, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deed. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bond'>Bond</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of gift, with bond, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>E</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement on wife, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with the gifts, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Defamation of comrade, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deferred payment of debt, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Degradation from judgeship, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deification of river Euphrates, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sacred river, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deposit:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how recoverable, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>123</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from minor or slave, how made legal, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made in temple for safety and banking, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Desertion:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by wife, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by husband, who returned to claim the property, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>involuntary, of wife by husband, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of adoptive parents, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of city and wife, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>136</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Detention of slave, penalty death, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>19</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diary of a journey, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dike:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burst and meadow was flooded, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>53</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be cared for, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disinheritance:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by adoptive parents, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>done before the judge, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>168</hi>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by due legal process, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>168</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried out before a judge, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of adopted child, not complete, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of adoptive parents, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mother by her son, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of son by his father, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>III</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of son by his mother, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>IV</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of son laid before a judge for inquiry, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>168</hi>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of son-in-law, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>159</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repudiation and reduction to the condition of slave, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>39</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Distraint. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-mancipium'>Mancipium</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of person in, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>115</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fine for illegal, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>114</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>of working ox, fine one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>241</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illegal on warehoused goods, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>security against illegal, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>114</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>District or city:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for ransom of official, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liable for highway robbery, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-divorce'/>
<l>Divorce:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as regulated by the Code, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custody of the children to the wife, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>easiest form of, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>easy for the man, difficult for the woman, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grounds of, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal ceremony, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man must give wife or concubine a maintenance, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>might marry again, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of concubine, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>of votary, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>price of divorce, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>139</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protection of the wife's rights, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retains right to her marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shares with her children in deceased husband's estate, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wife can only divorce by lawsuit, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wife takes her bride-price and marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>188</hi>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>if no bride-price, one mina of silver, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>139</hi>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>from plebeian one-third mina, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>140</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctor. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-surgeon'>Surgeon</ref>, <ref target='index-veterinary-surgeon'>Veterinary</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fees for curing, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215-221</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>paid by assailant, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>206</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalties, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218-220</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>privileges and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215-221</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Donations and bequests:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as alienation of property, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Assyria, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in second Babylonian Empire, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to temple a free gift, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the chief priest of the temple, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dowry. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-marriage-portion'>Marriage-portion</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drowning. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-death-penalty'>Death Penalty</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a penalty, considered, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as penalty for selling drink too cheap, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for desertion of husband, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for repudiating her husband, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for adultery, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for incest, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty on undutiful and slanderous wife, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>143</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duplicate:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of court decision, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of tablet, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ear cut off as penalty, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>205</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Education in ancient Babylonia, <ref target='Pg151'>151-153</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpretation of signs on the monuments, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>phrase-books, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>schools, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaves were apprenticed, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>writing and use of word-phrases, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elam, Elamites, troubles of, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elamite contracts, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elders as assessors to the judges, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endowment of temples by kings, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Entailed. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-family'>Family</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>family property, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Equals, assault on, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>200</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>203</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>204</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esarhaddon, King of Assyria:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his long absences, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inquiries about oracles, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter from, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sequence in his family, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Sennacherib, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Estates, great, plans of, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evicted:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purchaser reimbursed, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tenant reimbursed, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>Y</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exchange of benefice illegal, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>41</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expulsion of judge for altering judgment, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eye torn out, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fee for cure of, ten shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in diseased state, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knocked out by assailant, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>196</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss of eye assessed at half value of slave, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>220</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>operated on with bronze lancet, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-false-judgement'/>
<l>False judgment:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claims for money or goods, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>106</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>107</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witness, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id="index-family"/>
<l>Family:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alienation of property restricted by its rights, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attachment to ancestors, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>descendants of artisans, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in guilds of trade, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>property entailed, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>registration by father or master of the house, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>registration of birth, marriage, and death, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relations of, centred in marriage, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>registration of descent of, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Family life, responsibilities of, to the community, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Family laws, Sumerian, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-farm'/>
<l>Farm. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-lease'>Lease</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conditions of tenancy, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fields rented, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>house rented, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>rental variable, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken on shares, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatal assaults, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>207</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>208</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>210</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>214</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Father. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-children'>Children</ref>, <ref target='index-wife'>Wife</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disinheriting a son, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>168</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>169</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>giving dowry to a daughter, votary of Marduk, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights, duties, and responsibilities of, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Father-in-law:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and son-in-law not to quarrel over the marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>E</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if guilty of incest, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>responsibilities of, to intended son-in-law, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>159-161</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fees, to surgeon:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for limb or bowels cured, five shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>221</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for same on plebeian, three shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>222</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for same on slave, two shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>223</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for serious operation on cataract, ten shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for same on plebeian, five shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>216</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for same on man's slave, two shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>217</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for storage of corn, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>121</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to builder, two shekels of silver for each SAR built on, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>228</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to builder of boat, sixty GUR per man, two shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>234</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to veterinary, for curing ox or ass, one-sixth shekel of silver, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>224</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Field. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-land'>Land</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to real property, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-fines'/>
<l>Fines imposed for:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assault on patrician, one mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>204</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assault on plebeian, ten shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>203</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assault on pregnant free-woman, miscarried, ten shekels, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>209</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assault on pregnant plebeian woman, miscarried, five shekels, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>211</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assault on pregnant slave, miscarried, two shekels, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>213</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defrauding, 60 GUR of corn for each GAN, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>255</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal assault by mischance, one-half mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>207</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal assault on plebeian, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>208</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal assault on plebeian, pregnant, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>212</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal assault on pregnant slave, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>214</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illegal distraint, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>114</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imposing distraint on working ox, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>241</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not guarding against viciousness of bull, one-half mina of silver, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>251</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>if slave killed, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>252</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>patrician's servant's eye or limb, half his value, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>199</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plebeian's eye or limb, one mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>198</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plebeian's tooth, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>201</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seducing son's betrothed, one-half mina of silver, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theft of <hi rend='italic'>shadduf</hi>, or a plough, three shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>260</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theft of watering machine, five shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>259</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, theft at, its penalty, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>25</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fishing rights, how regulated, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Floods, flooding, by rain, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food-stuffs:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accounts of, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>request for, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forced labor. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-militia'>Militia</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forfeitures:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient custom in law courts, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for excessive cruelty, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for illegal seizure, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for illegalities, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>35</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>37</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for neglect, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>255</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>256</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foster-mother:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her duties and liabilities, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedom to:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrothed, after seduction, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brander, if deceived, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>227</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>concubine, after bringing up her children, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hostage for debt, in fourth year, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>117</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>widow, if persecuted by her children, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freemen made slaves, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fugitive slave, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>17</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or plebeian, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garden plot. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-land'>Land</ref>, <ref target='index-sales'>Sales</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to real property, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leasing and working, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>60-65</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sold as stocked, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stock, vegetables, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gens</hi>, its relation to the family, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-family'>Family</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gifts:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as conditioned, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as duly executed, signed, and sealed, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as pin-money to a wife, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as restricted, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by father to daughter, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedication to temple as free gift, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to friends and relatives open to suspicion, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>

<lg>
<l>God:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a party in every case in court, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has struck ox to death, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oaths by, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his temple the first centre of civilization, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goring by ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>250</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>251</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gouging out eye, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>196</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>198</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as penalty, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>196</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Governor, prefect:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liable to the death penalty, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not alienate or appropriate public property, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granary or barn, safe against creditor, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>113</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guarantees. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-pledges'>Pledges</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>against defects in slave, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>suits at law, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>theft, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joint responsibility, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarding slaves, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-slavery'>Slavery</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>securities for debt, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>security for appearance, as of witness, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of securities, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guilds:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of trade, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rival, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guilty knowledge by buyer of stolen goods, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>10</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ḥammurabi:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an administrator, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought back the goddesses, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>building enterprises, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>care for temple revenues, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cares for canals, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Code of laws, <ref target='Pg044'>44-67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its bibliography, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its value, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its condition, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>history of its text, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decides about taxes, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>epilogue to the Code, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters of, summarized, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>belong to the first dynasty of Babylon, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>their importance, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordering the calendar, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>private property, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prologue to the Code, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punishes bribery, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>redresses wrong, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supervises justice, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hand of God, loss by, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hands cut off as penalty:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for branding slave without leave, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>226</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>careless operation of surgeon, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>striking father, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>195</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harboring fugitive slave, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heirs, their reversionary rights, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Highway robbery, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>22-24</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>city or district responsible, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>22-24</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>22</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>redress for, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-hire'/>
<l>Hire. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-labor'>Labor</ref>, <ref target='index-wages'>Wages</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by king's standard, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>51</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of boat, 3 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>275</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>fast boat, 2-1/2 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>276</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>freight-boat of 60 GUR, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>277</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slave, adjustment of wages, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slave, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wages or hire fixed for:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>artisan, 5 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>ass for threshing, 10 ḲA of corn <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>269</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>boatman, 6 GUR of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>239</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>builder, (?) ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>carpenter, 4 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>field laborer, 8 GUR of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>257</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>herdsman or shepherd, 8 GUR of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>261</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>laborer, first five months, 6 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>273</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>laborer, last seven months, 5 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>273</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>milch cow, 3 GUR of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>243</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>ox herd, 6 GUR of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>258</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>ox for threshing, 20 ḲA of corn <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>268</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>oxen, wagon, and driver, 160 ḲA of corn <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>271</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>potter, 5 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>ropemaker, 4 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>slave, 10 ḲA of corn <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>VII</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>stone-cutter, (?) ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>tailor, 5 ŠE of silver <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>274</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wages and time limit, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>wagon alone, 40 ḲA of corn <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>272</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>working ox, 4 GUR of corn <hi rend='italic'>per annum</hi>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>242</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>young animal for threshing, 1 ḲA of corn <hi rend='italic'>per diem</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>270</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiring, risks in:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull, known to be vicious, kills freeman, one-half mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>251</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull, known to be vicious, kills slave, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>252</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull, mad and gores, the owner free, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>250</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox, broken horn or torn muzzle or tail cut off, quarter the value of ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>248</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox, cut or broken leg, ox for ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>246</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox, died from the elements, on affidavit man is free, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox gored to death or killed by blows, ox for ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>245</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox, loses an eye, half the value of ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>247</hi></l>
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox or ass killed by lion in open field, owner's risk, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>244</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave killed, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>252</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hostage for debt. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-mancipium'>Mancipium</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Housebreaking, its penalties, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>21</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-houses'/>
<l>Houses:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>block of, in Nineveh, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bought as area of land, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial vault in, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contracts for building, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cost, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deed of sale, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description for sale, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to land, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plans of, and description, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>price, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>side buildings, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>size, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>various parts of, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypothecation, law of, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Identification of lost property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignorance, plea of, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>206</hi>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>227</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illegal purchase and its penalty, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>35</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>37</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Impaling:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a penalty considered, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death penalty to wife for conniving at her husband's murder, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>153</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incest:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crime of, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>154-158</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man and daughter, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, man banished the city, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man and daughter-in-law, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, man strangled and woman drowned, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man and his mother, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>157</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, both burnt, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>157</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man and step-mother, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>158</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, to be cut off from his father's house, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>158</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man and woman betrothed to his son, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, half mina of silver and marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-inheritance'/>
<l>Inheritance. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-marriage'>Marriage</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>implied in adoption, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sons by second marriage, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>D</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights of, considered, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>succession by law of descent, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interest:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the king's standard, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>51</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calculated by the merchant, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on bond to creditor, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on temporary loan, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on use of corn, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>postponed for a year, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relations between interest and profit, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron, mention of, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judge:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acts on marriage-portions, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>E</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>G</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duties and liabilities, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>13</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his position in ancient Babylonia, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how the case was submitted, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inquires in interest of children of first marriage, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of sentences and decisions by, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name of officials in Assyrian times, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to witness branding, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judgment, false. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-false-judgement'>False</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by default, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>13</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be altered, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kidnapping, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>14</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>could impress laborers, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endowed temples, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gave loans, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>often before harvest, or at seed-time, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>granted privileges, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had power of life, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his power over lands, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>limited, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>limited by rights of private property, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made large land grants, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>power to pardon, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents made between kings, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probably wrote, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King's standard of money, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>51</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kudur, Governor of Erech, letters of, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-labor'/>
<l>Labor, forced. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-militia'>Militia</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free, in demand, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guaranteed, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in competition, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time hired, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lancet. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bronze'>Bronze</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-land'/>
<l>Land:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a field, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as garden, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancestral domain, claimed, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boundary stones, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedication to a temple, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different from personal property, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different kinds of real property, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entailed property, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great estates, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>their plans, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hired or let on shares, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how described for identification, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to houses, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its individuality, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king's power over, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>landmarks, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leases, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loans on, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obligations of many kinds, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ownership of cultivated, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive tenure, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sale of, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settled hamlet, temple, etc., <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sold subject to its dues, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>systems of measurement, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>by the yield, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tenure in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>terms applied to, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Metayer system, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>253-256</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the purchaser, how protected, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under manorial obligations, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>village, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landlord. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-metayer'>Metayer</ref>, <ref target='index-temple'>Temple</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loans to tenants, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>risks, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landmarks, inviolable, not to be encroached upon, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-lease'/>
<l>Lease, tenancy, tenant, farm:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abatements for losses by flood, etc., <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allowances, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>damages incurred, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different forms of, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>; fixed rent, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>improving lease, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duties and responsibilities of, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>field to cultivate, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>43</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>garden on five-year lease, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>60</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land on three-year lease, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life, rare, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not invalidated by neglect to cultivate, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>52</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but damages to be given, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>63</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of property generally, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>farm-house, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>rental variable, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>questions of rent and adjustments, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50-52</hi>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights as between money-lender and owner of farm, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rent due at harvest-time, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>47</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>risks are the farmer's, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>as between owner and tenant, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stipulations, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subletting, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>47</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tenant cannot be evicted, or can have damages, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>Y</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leather, accounts of, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legal:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decisions, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>defects in slaves, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>difficult to classify, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal procedure in Babylon illustrated, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letters and letter-writing in Babylonia, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>about Elam and southern Babylonia, <ref target='Pg360'>360-364</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Assyrian, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>business, and orders, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cappadocian, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>classification of, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>colloquial phrasing, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>difference in deciphering, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elliptical phrases, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of letter, baked clay, 307</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its envelope, 307</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its date, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from the last year of Shamash-shum-ukin, <ref target='Pg347'>347-352</ref> <hi rend='italic'>q.v.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>historical value of, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>love-letter, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>methods of securing privacy, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>miscellaneous Assyrian, <ref target='Pg365'>365-381</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Abêshu', <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ammi-ditana, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ammi-zadûga, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of first Babylonian dynasty, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ḥammurabi, <hi rend='italic'>q.v.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Samsu-iluna, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref> <hi rend='italic'>q.v.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sin-iddinam, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of subsequent period, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Tell el Amarna, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the second Babylonian Empire, <ref target='Pg382'>382-385</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old Babylonian, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other letters, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>postal system for, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>private, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>private, of first Babylonian dynasty, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarding affairs in southern Babylonia, <ref target='Pg353'>353-359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sennacherib to his father Sargon, <ref target='Pg338'>338-346</ref> <hi rend='italic'>q.v.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>style of address, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translations of, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>variations of formula in, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Levy-master, warrant-officer, tributary. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-militia'>Militia</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brands an escaped slave, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his duty and privilege, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26-29</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30-39</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion, destruction by, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>244</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>266</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Litigation not encouraged, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-loans'/>
<l>Loans. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-metayer'>Metayer</ref>, <ref target='index-trading'>Trading</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by merchants and agents, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for payment of taxes, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from the temple, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>giving pledges as security, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in series of advances, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by the king, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of corn, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of current coin, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of material or property, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of oil, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of other produce, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of property on approval, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wine, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of working material, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on exchange, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on land, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-land'>Land</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on pledges named, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-pledges'>Pledges</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on promissory notes, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on usual interest, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on vineyard of slaves, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receipts for, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receipts for repayment of, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>records of, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary, at harvest-time, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of preserved bonds, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Local liability for:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compensation for highway robbery, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>24</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>redemption of captive official, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loss:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by God's hand, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>266</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by housebreaking or rebellion, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of claim in court, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or no claim allowed, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of crop, shared by landlord, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of flock or herd, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>226</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of hired animals, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>245</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of interest, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>48</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lost property:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretence of losing, how punished, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovery by owner, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sale by finder equals theft, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lying in claiming goods, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9-13</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magistrate, city or district governor,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is liable for crime within the bounds, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>24</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maid. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-slave'>Slave</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given by votary to husband to have children, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her children free, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how made equal to wife's, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>170</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be sold if childless, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be sold if a mother, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to rival her mistress, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, to receive the slave-mark, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maintenance:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of concubine and divorced wife, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife secured, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133-135</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-mancipium'/>
<l>Mancipium, hostage to work off debt:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>difference in free born or slave, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in natural death, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>115</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in violent death, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave may be sold by creditor, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>118</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>redeemed by debtor, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>119</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but not if mother of creditor's children, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>119</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wife, son, or daughter free in fourth year, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>117</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manslaughter:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by blow in quarrel, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>207</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>208</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of hostage, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>penalty, if a slave, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manufacturing partnership, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marduk:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Babylon, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had votaries at Babylon, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>182</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oath by, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Eridu, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marking. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-branding'>Branding</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other than slaves, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaves, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-marriage'/>
<l>Marriage:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bride given away usually by the father, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>sometimes by the mother or brother, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or by agnates, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatherless girls in, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>home and home-going, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monogamy and polygamy, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not quite free to man or woman, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of king's daughter, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of second wife in the time of the first wife, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>148</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of two sisters to one man, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preliminaries, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents and payments, <ref target='Pg130'>130-132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>registration, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rôle of contracting parties, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the bond of the family organization, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unhappy, and its results, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>votaries, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wife required father-in-law's consent, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with attached conditions, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>husband to maintain mother-in-law, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>dower his wife if he sends her away, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>wife to be thrown from a pillar if she leaves him, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage conditions. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-children'>Children</ref>, <ref target='index-marriage'>Marriage</ref>, <ref target='index-share'>Share</ref>, <ref target='index-widow'>Widow</ref>, <ref target='index-wife'>Wife</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at a definite place, <q>wedding-house,</q> <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Babylonia, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presents to the parents of the bride, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>questions owing to unfaithfulness, <ref target='Pg054'>54-56</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>having concubines and maids, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>registration, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suitor rejected through slander, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>there must be marriage contract, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>128</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage contract. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bond'>Bond</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preliminaries, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-marriage-portion'/>
<l>Marriage-portion. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bride-price'>Bride-price</ref>, <ref target='index-marriage'>Marriage</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanies widow to a second husband, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>H</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belongs to her and all her children, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>H</hi>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belongs to the children only, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>162</hi>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by <q>deed of gift,</q> as pin-money, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>good against husband's heirs, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but forfeited by second marriage, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>childless widow takes it from the estate, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>G</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>could not be reclaimed as against children, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doubt in case of free wife of slave, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>father cannot reclaim against children, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>162</hi>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in lands, oxen, furniture, etc., <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its nature, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the bride-price, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>C</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lawsuit about, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>less bride-price, if not repaid to husband, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>164</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nature of, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of concubine, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presented to concubine's daughter, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>184</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receipts for the payment of, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returned to injured wife, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>invalid wife, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>149</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returned to the wife's father's house, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>F</hi>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returned to wife's father, if no children, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>163</hi>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>separate estate, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>149</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>162</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>163</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174-176</hi>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>184</hi>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 219</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement of, by bride's father, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>C</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shall be adjudged an equivalent, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>G</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shared by children of both marriages, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>173</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or by children of first only, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by widow to second husband, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trousseau, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when not paid through inability, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>E</hi>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>not to be cause of quarrel, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>E</hi>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when paid in full, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriages in ancient Babylonia, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Master, rights and duties, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>176</hi>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>217</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>223</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Measure:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of land by area, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>by the average yield, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of timber or stone, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-merchant'/>
<l>Merchant, agent, money-lender, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acting by caravans, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bound to receive payment in kind, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>Z</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>business with agents, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100-107</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>capital out on speculation, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has crop assigned for debt, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>X</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has to be reimbursed for ransoming official, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his position in ancient Babylonia, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>trading, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to business agent, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a distant transaction, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in different relations of business, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50-52</hi>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116-119</hi>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>151</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>X</hi>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>Z</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in purchasing foreign slaves, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>281</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal memoranda for security, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must keep accurate accounts, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sharing in the farm with owner, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>51</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>using canals, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-metayer'/>
<l>Metayer. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-land'>Land</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by the temples, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of tenancy, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>253-256</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metrology, contributions to, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Micheau stone, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-militia'/>
<l>Militia, statute-labor, corvée. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-slavery'>Slavery</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>classes subject to, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considered as a system, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duty and privilege of its officers, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26-29</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30-39</hi>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>40-41</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forced service, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illegal impressment, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the army, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>service in weaving establishments, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>some cities were exempted, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supplied from slavery, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minor:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as incapable, with slave, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights reserved, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miscarriage. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-assault'>Assault</ref>, <ref target='index-fines'>Fine</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aggravation in assault, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>209</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>211</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>213</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Money. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-hire'>Hire</ref>, <ref target='index-fines'>Fines</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as earnest to close the bargain, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>current coin, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deferred payments of, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter requesting, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions in giving and receiving, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>105</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to belong to a god, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-monogamy'/>
<l>Monogamy. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-marriage'>Marriage</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in early days, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-mortgages'/>
<l>Mortgages:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entire pledging, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>related to pledges, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-pledges'>Pledges</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second, debarred, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second mortgage secured, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mother:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in charge of son's education, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>29</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest with, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>157</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>power over children, <ref target='Pg148'>148-150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mutilations, by order of judge, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabonidus, his place in chronology, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebuchadrezzar:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his chronology, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his exploits, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clan, from office in the temple, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Semitic, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>show slave's origin or nationality, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>significant, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Notary, his fee for writing out a bond, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nurse, her duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-oath'/>
<l>Oath. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-affidavit'>Affidavit</ref>, <ref target='index-bond'>Bond</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>about foreign slave, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>281</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to death of ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposit, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depreciation, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>estimate of goods on lost boat, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>240</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to loss, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by brander, that he was misled, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>227</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disclaiming evil intention, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>206</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>207</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for confirmation of sale, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for purgation, taken by agent, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>102</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>103</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>106</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>taken by principal, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>107</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>taken by owner of corn, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how administered, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its purport and where taken, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on loss by lightning or lion, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>266</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to clear from charge of adultery, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>131</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Octroi duties, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-official'/>
<l>Official. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bailiff'>Bailiff</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot give his benefice in exchange, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>40</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>41</hi></l>
<l>compensation of official, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>27</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30-39</hi>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duty and position considered, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has his own private rights, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>39</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holds lands by royal charter, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if captured on the king's business, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>to be ransomed, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>how the ransom is to be paid, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liable to death penalty, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may resume use of the benefice, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>27</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to appropriate or alienate public property, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>33-38</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be hired out, plundered, or oppressed, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>35</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to depute duty, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on enforced absence, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>27</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one year allowed, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for neglect, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>31</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>provision for son in absence, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>29</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights as against substitutes, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>26-29</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>service of, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son may be deputy, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>28</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the benefice or feoff, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three years' limit, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>30</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old age provision:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by adoption, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by son, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omens and predictions, letter illustrative of, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordeal by water:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considered as a legal custom, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for witchcraft, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nature of, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to purge from slander, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-owners-risk'/>
<l>Owner's risk in hiring. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-hire'>Hire</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>horse killed, at God's hand, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss by lightning or lion, on herdsman's oath, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>266</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox or ass, killed in open field, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>244</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palace:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the priesthood, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>place for archives, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>title for the royal state authority, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>187</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Partnership:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a manufacturing, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dissolution of, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its earliest appearance, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its evidence in Assyrian literature, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>later Babylonian, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its ideogram, <ref target='Pg287'>287-289</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to capital, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old commercial custom, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>partnership documents, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>powers of attorney, for protection, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reckonings, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patrician, highest class in the state, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-penalties'/>
<l>Penalties:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as demanded for wrong-doing, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood vengeance commuted, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for adultery, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for perjury in courts of law, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned and bailed out, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in courts of law, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to prevent failure in contract, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman thrown from a pillar, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penalty due for. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-retaliation'>Retaliation</ref>, <ref target='index-fines'>Fines</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>adultery by a wife, strangling, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>adultery, drowning, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>133</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of hostage slave, one-third of a mina of silver, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal assault on pregnant woman, death of his daughter, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>209</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprudent speech, tongue cut out, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest, mother and son burnt, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>157</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest, banished the city, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest, half mina of silver and the marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest, strangling, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest, the man cut off from his father's house, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>158</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incest, woman drowned, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on brander for branding without leave, hands cut off, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>226</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>if deceived, accused is free, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>227</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son for striking father, hands cut off, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave for striking freeman's privates, ear cut off, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>205</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>veterinary, for loss of ox or ass, one-fourth of its value, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>225</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wet-nurse for neglect, breasts cut off, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>permanent injury in a quarrel, pay the doctor, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>206</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rape of betrothed, death, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>130</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slander, forehead branded, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>striking a superior's privates, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> blows of ox-hide scourge, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>202</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>undutifulness and slander, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>143</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unnatural conduct, eyes torn out, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unsuccessful operation by surgeon, hands cut off, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>same on slave, slave for slave, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>219</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>loss of slave's eye, half his value, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>220</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perjury:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in capital trial, has death penalty, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in civil case, gives damages, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>13</hi>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrase-books:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Babylonian, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their plan, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pillar, thrown from, a penalty, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pin-money, gift to a wife, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plaintiff, his position in a case, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plebeian, poor man, between patrician and slave:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abduction of slave from, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>15</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assault by, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>204</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>208</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cheaper divorce, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>140</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fees paid by, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>208</hi>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>222</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harboring fugitive slave, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi></l>
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave-owner, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>15</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>176</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theft from, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of eye or limb, one mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>198</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of tooth, one-third mina of silver, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>201</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-pledges'/>
<l>Pledges and guarantees. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-loans'>Loans</ref>, <ref target='index-mortgages'>Mortgages</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an after-pledge, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>antichretic pledges, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>complications, <ref target='Pg265'>265-268</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>information meagre, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loan on vineyard and of slaves, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>on service of a maid, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>on the borrower's service, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mortgages, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on land to secure a loan, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>property in satisfaction of debt, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the subject held as security, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, x, xi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their relation to the interest, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of the pledge, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>creditor's responsibility toward it, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polygamy. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-concubine'>Concubinage</ref>, <ref target='index-marriage'>Marriage</ref>, <ref target='index-monogamy'>Monogamy</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Assyrian times, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clear evidence of, among serfs and slaves, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from bigamy, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pregnant woman. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-assault'>Assault</ref>, <ref target='index-fines'>Fine</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Price of drink, how regulated, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>108</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>111</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>artificer, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to the king, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>honors paid to the priesthood, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>public position and duties, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>steward, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>warden, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prisoner:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pleads for liberty, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recaptured slave pleads, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Private property, its rights, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Produce rent:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as agreed upon, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of field, on shares, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>41-46</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of garden, on shares, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>64</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Promissory notes on loans, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Property:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alienation of its rights, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alienation by sales. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-sales'>Sales</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consent of heirs to its disposal, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>devolution of, by gifts, bequests, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>importance of studying its alienation, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>method of describing, for identification, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>methods of identifying on sale, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protection of purchaser from fraud, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sales, conditions, payments, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proprietary rights in temple income, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Public:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forced labor, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-militia'>Militia</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obligations, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ransom, of captive official, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by himself, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the State, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from temple treasury, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not from his benefice, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rape of betrothed maiden, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>130</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rebellion, loss by, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Receipt, sealed document:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as taken by agent and depositor, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>124</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>204</hi>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for a fine, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for deposits rare, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for loan, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for repayment of loan, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Receiving of stolen goods, death penalty, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Records of business transactions, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bond'>Bond</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Recovery:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by power of attorney, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of lost property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>10</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>124</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redemption. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-mancipium'>Mancipium</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of maid, held for debt, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>119</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Refusal:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by slave to name his owner, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>18</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of conjugal rights, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Registration:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the master of the house, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarantee of ancestry, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of birth, marriage, and death, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remarriage:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage-portion goes to the children, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>173</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of divorced woman, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of widow, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>173</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remission of penalty, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rent:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>average, made payable, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>42</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>43</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>55</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>62</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>65</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>five ḲA of corn on each GUR of corn, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>121</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for storage of corn, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>121</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of garden plot, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>60</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>61</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>62</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of unbroken land, on three-year lease, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on garden plot, ten GUR of corn for each GAN of land, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>63</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>paid at harvest-time, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>47</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>payments in kind, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>47</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ten GUR of corn for each GAN of land, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>44</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrought on shares, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>64</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>65</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repatriation of slave, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>280</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>281</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repudiation:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of adoptive parents, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of father by son, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>I</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of husband by wife, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>V</hi>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mother by son, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>II</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife by husband, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>VI</hi>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>

<lg>
<l>Responsibility in service:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of employer, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>VII</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of tenant farmer, and neglect punished, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>253-256</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Restitution, compensation, damages, reimbursement:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accident, builder gives slave for slave, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>231</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boatman must restore the weak boat, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>235</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>must restore the lost boat, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>236</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>must restore boat and cargo, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>237</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builder must rebuild, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>232</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builder of unkeyed wall must rebuild, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>233</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considered as an ancient custom, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death in highway robbery, one mina of silver to relatives, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>24</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depreciation of property, make it good from the corn hoed, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>254</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diminishing ox or sheep, give up to the agreements, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>264</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>embezzlement of goods, sheep or ox, tenfold return, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>265</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal operation on slave, slave for slave, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>219</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fivefold by carrier for goods lost, stolen, or appropriated, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>12</hi>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>112</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss made good, if herdsman at fault, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>267</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss of goods, goods for goods, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>231</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>owner of boat in collision responsible for boat and cargo, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>240</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox gored, ox for ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>246</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox injured seriously, ox for ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>246</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ox or ass lost, restore ox or ass, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>263</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>shadduf</hi>, or plough, three shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>260</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simple, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>10</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>12</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sixfold for overcharging agent, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>107</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tenfold for theft by poor man, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thirtyfold for theft by patrician, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>threefold for cheating principal, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>106</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>twelvefold for false sentence by judge, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>twofold for goods in store, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>124</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>twofold for pretence of losing goods, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>watering machine stolen, five shekels of silver to owner, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>259</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-retaliation'/>
<l>Retaliation. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-penalties'>Penalties</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dishonesty in stewardship, hands cut off, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>253</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eye for eye, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>196</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for defrauding, torn to pieces on that field by the oxen, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>256</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if builder's son dies, builder's son is put to death, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>230</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if slave is killed, builder gives slave for slave, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>231</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its principles in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>limb for limb, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>197</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slave for repudiating master, ear cut off, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>282</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tooth for tooth, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>200</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Return of slave purchased:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for defect, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>279</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>within one month for <hi rend='italic'>bennu</hi> disease, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>278</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reward for slave capture, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>17</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riparian responsibilities, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>53-56</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Risks:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>farmer's, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>46</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>owner's. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-owners-risk'>Owner</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tenant's, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>warehouseman's, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roads, their maintenance, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robbery, highway, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>22</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Runnel for watering, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>55</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred river, for ordeal, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shared in by the temple, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes sold for cash, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrilegious theft from temple, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sale:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of crop for debt, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>51</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man and goods to pay debt, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>53</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>54</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-sales'/>
<l>Sales:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>agent in, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alienation of property, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all interests safeguarded in the deed, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deferred payments, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>formal preliminaries, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fraud in, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>stocked, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>granaries, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occasional use of oath in, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of fields in first Babylonian dynasty, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>in Assyrian times, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of houses, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-houses'>Houses</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalties for failure, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>records at early date, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>registration of, in temple archives, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retention till payment, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returned on failure to pay, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights of purchaser, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transaction of the business, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unimproved land, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samsu-iluna:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>care for deity, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>temple dues, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his canal dug, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters of, summarized, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>few in number, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their subject, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regulates fishing rights, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>writes on business, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sargon, King of Babylon:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his date fixed, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters to, from Sennacherib, his son, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scandal, met by ordeal, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scourge of ox-hide, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>202</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scourging:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a penalty, sixty blows, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>202</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>considered as an ancient custom, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>

<lg>
<l>Scribe:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>male and female, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not a priest or judge, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often a woman, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the profession, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seal. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bond'>Bond</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seditious meetings not allowed in beer-shops, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>109</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seduction:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of betrothed daughter-in-law, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>130</hi>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slave from service, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>15</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sennacherib:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>father of Esarhaddon, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters to his father, Sargon, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>argument for identification of writer, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relating to Armenia, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their value for reconstructing history, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Separation:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>husband deserted home and wife, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wife deserted home, belittled husband, etc., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serfs, <hi rend='italic'>glebae adscripti</hi>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different from slaves, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disappearance, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hereditary condition, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sesame:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crop with corn, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>49</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>50-52</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receipts for, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Settlement:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for children of second wife, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>D</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mutual deeds in, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>C</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>given by fathers of bride and bride-groom, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>C</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of pin-money, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on wife by <q>deed of gift,</q> <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on wife by husband, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on widow, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>by widow on children, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>out of court, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Shadduf</hi> stolen, fine three shekels of silver, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>260</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shalmaneser IV., <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamash-shum-ukîn:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contemporary events, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters illustrating his reign, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> , <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Esarhaddon, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-share'/>
<l>Share. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-bond'>Bond</ref>, <ref target='index-inheritance'>Inheritance</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belonging to votary or vowed woman, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>179-182</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between brothers, cases of, <ref target='Pg161'>161-165</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children of first and second husband share equally in marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>173</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>of first share it all, if no second family, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children of maid, if acknowledged by father, share with children of wife, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>170</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but children of wife take precedence, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>170</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children of two marriages, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>K</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dividing of father's estate, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>division at father's death, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>167</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>mother's death, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>167</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divorced wife has a child's part, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>farmed, leased on shares, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>41-46</hi>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of land tenancy, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of deceased father's estate to eldest son, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>165</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sacrifices by temple, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes sold for cash, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reversionary interest to brothers, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sons of second wife, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>D</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>widow on remarriage, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>H</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with reservation, gift to favorite, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>165</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wife's marriage present, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>bride-price for unmarried son, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>166</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>portion for votary sister, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>damage done by, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>57</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>58</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manner of grazing them, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>58</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep-shearing, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shepherd, duties and responsibilities of, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>262-267</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shipping:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boats hired, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its value in trading, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-iddinam, letters of, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skins, account of, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slander:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>against votary or unmarried woman, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in capital suit, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be profitable, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of title to property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>11</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wife, to be purged by ordeal, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seditious, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>109</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-slave'/>
<l>Slave, one of the three estates, domestic, inferior. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-slavery'>Slavery</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a chattel, property, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apprenticed, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an institution, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assaults freeman, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>205</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Assyrian usages regarding, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>authorities upon the system and facts, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>its history, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bad wife reduced to, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>been gored by a vicious ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>252</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>branding or tattooing, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>child of slave, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children to the master, may succeed equally with wife's children, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>170</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or only obtain their freedom, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>condemned to forced labor, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure of, master pays bill, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>217</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>219</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>223</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different from the serfs, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diseases of, bennu, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence not good against a free man, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fees paid for teaching apprentice, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreign born, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreign slaves, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>281</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free child made slave as a provision for life, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fugitive, harboring, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>16</hi></l>
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarantees in sale, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had much freedom, but bound, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had private property, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hired laborer, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-hire'>Hire</ref>, <ref target='index-wages'>Wages</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her children, how legitimatized, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his children free, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his obligations to the state, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tablet or name-plate, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his widow takes her marriage-portion and half their goods, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or at least half the goods for her children, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>176</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>history of one traced, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how estimated in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if child-bearing, maid could not be sold, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in <hi rend='italic'>bennu</hi> disease, returned on seller, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>280</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intermarriage and inheritance, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws of capture, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>17-20</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal defects, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter on runaway slaves, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manumission of slaves, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>280</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>married, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries free woman, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>175</hi>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>master's maid and fruitful, cannot be sold, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>119</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>master apprenticed slave, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>means of identification, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names significant, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not free to make bargain, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to rival her mistress, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on different footing with concubine, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>price of, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punished, for repudiating his master, by loss of ear, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>282</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recaptured runaway forfeit to the state, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relative proportion in the population, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>responsibility of seller of, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reward for capture and restoration, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>17</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>right to his family and property, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights of, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights and obligations of owners, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>17-20</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>runaway, question of return, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sale of, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>security against defects in, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seduction from service, penal, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>15</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>skilled artisan, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>status, complex, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supplied the militia, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value estimated, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of female slave's children, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>widow has one son's share of estate, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>free at her master's death, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-slavery'/>
<l>Slavery:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>advantages of, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>branding, tattooing, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children sold into, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discussed, relating to Babylonia, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarantees against rebellion, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>flight, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>untimely death, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>unexpected claims, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>over-exaction in the public service, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>redemption as men of family, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>illegal enslavement, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>means of indicating, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modes of entering into, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recruited from freemen, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relative proportion to the population, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sales, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>significant names in, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supplied the army, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>the militia, corvée, or levy for forced labor, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soldiers:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a public obligation, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>might pay substitutes, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their place in the state, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their relations to the forced labor, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their system, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Son:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by adoption, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></hi>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disinheritance of, to be inquired into by judge, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>168</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>169</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>allowed or disallowed by judge, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>168</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>169</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first crime against father pardoned, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>169</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife abused by his father, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>156</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must have father's consent to marry, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the royal favorite, royal household, or votary, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>187</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>must be prudent of speech, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>193</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>under penalty, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>194</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for striking father, hands cut off, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>195</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>privileges as father's substitute, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>28</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>29</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives deed of gift from father, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>165</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>also his share in estate, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>165</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights given by adoption. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-adoption'>Adoption</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>young son, unmarried, to be provided for, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>166</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>State:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>composed of three classes, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>having other grades, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steward:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accounts from, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple officer, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stolen goods, retention of equals theft, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>10</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strangling, penalty of, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>155</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Striking. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-assault'>Assault</ref>, <ref target='index-fines'>Fines</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of father by son, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>195</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suitor:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to bride's parents, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rejected, his rights, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>160</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rejected through calumny by comrade, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>161</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuses to marry, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>159</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suits of many kinds, <ref target='Pg102'>102-107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suits at law:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>damages for loss and breach of trust, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposit, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>family dispute, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forged will, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for income, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gift, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>house, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inheritance, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legacy, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loss of hired ass, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>over adoption, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>partnership, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>property, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rent, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theft of a bull, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>theft of four slaves, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>title to garden, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vexatious persecution, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summons to appear in court, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-surgeon'/>
<l>Surgeon:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>operations and fees, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>223</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Fees</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalties for unsuccessful operations, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218-220</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sworn depositions. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-oath'>Oath</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for lost property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>23</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for lost money, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>102</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>103</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for quarrel and striking, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>206</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on cost of boat and cargo, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>240</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on gored ox, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>249</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tablet:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an irrevocable witness, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bibliography, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>as classified, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>broken, breaking a contract, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cappadocian, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contract, its real character, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>duplicate of, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>A</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its form, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on loan, its modern value, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>value for chronology, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>peculiarity of, on corn loan, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>present location, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sealed, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>A</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>served as name-plate, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shows the same handwriting throughout, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>signed by the seal, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tattooing and branding escaped slave, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taxes:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loaning money to pay, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>question of ancient, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their collection, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tell el Amarna letters, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-temple'/>
<l>Temple:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a business institution, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a place of deposit and traffic, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a trading institution, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as landowner, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>centre of civilization, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clan names from office in, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedication of children to, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>of land to, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>to secure divine favor, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endowed by kings, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endowments, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had large dues, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hereditary rights in, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its archives for registers, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its importance in the state, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to ethics, divination, magic, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the palace, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to the state, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its rights and influences, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its slaves were as serfs, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its staff and influence, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its tithe, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its treasuries and storehouses, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings made enforced loans from, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>large landowner, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lending money, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>loans from, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>negotiable rights in, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>officials as witnesses, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>officials in, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of the dues, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>property protected, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proprietary rights in income, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>right to income, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shared in the sacrifices, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>testamentary devolution of property, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treasury used for ransom, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>32</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>value of its archives, ix</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tenant. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-lease'>Lease</ref>, <ref target='index-land'>Land</ref>, <ref target='index-farm'>Farm</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defrauding owner, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>255</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>torn to pieces on the field by the oxen, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>256</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fixed rent, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of holding, and amenities, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>253</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forms of tenancy, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> , 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>improving lease, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on shares, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>redress from, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>254</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>risks, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>45-47</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theft:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first order, from temple or house, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>6</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from deposit, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from fire, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>25</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made good by banker, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalties, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>25</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered from thief, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second order, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>securities against, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Metayer, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>253-256</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tithe:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence needed, xi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how paid, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the temple, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Title-deed destroyed for illegal purchase, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>37</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tongue cut out as penalty, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>192</hi>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-trading'/>
<l>Trading, trade:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between capital and labor, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its laws, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>money out on speculation, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>102</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>103</hi>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relations in, by principal and agent, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>100-107</hi>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trespass, law of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>54</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>55</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trousseau, bride's, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trust, deposit, storage. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-carrier'>Carrier</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>care in depositing valuables, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>122-126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn put in store, and amount disputed, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valuables:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claim is contested, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>123-126</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposited before witnesses, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>122-124</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on deposit, care of, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>122-126</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Values:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>difference of free-born and slave as hostage, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>116</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sixty ḲA of <hi rend='italic'>sakani</hi> beer for fifty ḲA of corn, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>111</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-veterinary-surgeon'/>
<l>Veterinary surgeon:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his duties and responsibilities, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>224-226</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for unsuccessful operation, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>225</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicarious punishments, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Village lands and tenure in Babylonia, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Votaries:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their position, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>succession of, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Votary:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a mother and divorced, her legal rights, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>her children's legal rights, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belonging to convent, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>devoted by mother, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>donation from father, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dowered as for marriage, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expected to keep her virginity, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free to leave her portion, if allowed by father's deed, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>179</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>otherwise, brothers assume the estate and manage it, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or, if not content, she can farm it out, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but cannot alienate it from her brothers, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>178</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>frequenting beer-shop, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has dowry by deed of free gift from her father, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>179</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if dedicated to Marduk of Babylon, and not portioned, shall have one-third of child's share, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>182</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if not given a portion, is entitled to one-third of child's share, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>181</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaves property as she pleases, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>182</hi>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liable to death penalty, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>low in rank, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage with, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144</hi>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may give maid to her husband, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but husband may not marry a concubine, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or the concubine will not equal the votary, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>145</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may sell a barren concubine, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>147</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must leave share to her brothers, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>181</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be beer-seller, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>110</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be slandered, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to adopted son, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights in gift made by, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shall not admit the concubine to an equality, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>146</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shall pay no taxes, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>182</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of, shall not be reclaimed from adoption, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>187</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-wages'/>
<l>Wages. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-hire'>Hire</ref>, <ref target='index-labor'>Labor</ref>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>advances made in lieu of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>average, estimated, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liable to adjustment, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>living included, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often paid in produce, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warden, temple officer, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warehousing:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>claims contested, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>124</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fee or rent, five ḲA of corn for each GUR of corn, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>121</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions in depositing valuables, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>122</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>123</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>responsibilities, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>120-126</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weaving:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accounts of, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>establishments, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weights and measures, tables of, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-widow'/>
<l>Widow:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannot legally sell anything, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children of second wife, their rights, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children's inheritance, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>167-172</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>could not marry and desert children in minority, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>without consent of law court, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>free to marry the man of her choice, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gift, made by deed, her own, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has, as a portion, one son's share, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has right to remain in husband's house, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her conduct and character inquired into, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her rights, <ref target='Pg145'>145-147</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage-portion her own, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may leave, and be married again, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>can only take her marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>children of both marriages share equally in the marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>173</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>or, if only one family, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may marry again, but children's interests conserved, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>must give bonds as trustee with second husband, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>gives inventory of property and obligation to preserve the property, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-wife'/>
<l>Wife:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as trustee of children of first marriage, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>177</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bad, may be prosecuted, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>divorced without compensation, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>reduced to the status of slave, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>141</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrothal and marriage ceremony, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>character of good, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>childless, her marriage-portion returns to her father's house, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>F</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children of second wife take one-third of property, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>D</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conniving at her husband's murder, impaled, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>153</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consent of father-in-law, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deceased, her marriage-portion is the children's, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>162</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>degraded to the condition of slave, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>denies conjugal rights, its complications, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>may take her marriage-portion and return to her father, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deserted by husband, free to marry, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>136</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>desertion by husband, involuntary, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>by husband, voluntary, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divorced, her legal rights, if a mother, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>if not a mother, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dowry and marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>falsely accused, and cleared by oath, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>financial responsibilities between husband and wife, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>151</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>152</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>question as to ante-nuptial, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>151</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first home and home-going, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her marriage registered, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her pin-money, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her rights, if sent away, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her trousseau, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>if childless, it returns to her father's house, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>163</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>husband has no claim to it, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>163</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>bride-price to be deducted from the marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>163</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in monogamy and polygamy, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invalid cannot be put away, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>148</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>or divorced, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>148</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>but may claim her marriage-portion and go to her father, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>149</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws and conditions of divorce, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-divorce'>Divorce</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage performed at <q>wedding-house,</q> <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be saved by husband from death penalty, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may be a votary, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>144-146</hi>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may claim separation on account of cruelty, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>142</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may sell a childless concubine, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>147</hi>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must have marriage contract, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>128</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be slandered, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>127</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of captive and not maintained, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>134</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>marries another, and returns to first, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>135</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>children remain with their father, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>135</hi>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>penalty for adultery, strangling, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>129</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>results to a bad wife, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retains legal power over marriage deed of gift, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>may leave it to her child, but not to her kindred, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>150</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rights if a widow, once or twice, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>171</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>173</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>174</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>and of her children, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>172-174</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second, different kinds of, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second, when allowed, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>137</hi>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>138-141</hi>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>148</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shares of two wives and their families, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>167</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slandered, cleared by ordeal, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>132</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sold into slavery, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son's wife, rude to mother-in-law, may be branded and sold, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>undutiful and slanderous, may be drowned, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>143</hi>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>widow and childless, takes marriage-portion from the estate, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>G</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>takes any marriage gift, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>G</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>and it shall be adjudged an equivalent, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>G</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>widow, on remarriage, takes her marriage-portion, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>H</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>is succeeded in her marriage-portion by children of both marriages, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>H</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>takes her marriage gifts, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>H</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witchcraft:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and ordeal, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws against, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witness:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examined on oath, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>false, in civil suit, pays the expenses, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for deposits, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>122</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>123</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>124</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>125</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>must know the lost property, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps attached to law court, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>production of, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>required for legal purchase, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>9</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suffers death for perjury, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the position considered, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time extended for production of, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>13</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to a bond or deed, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to sign or seal, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wool:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>different kinds of, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>memoranda regarding, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wounds:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cured by surgeon, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>215-218</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>by veterinary surgeon, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>224</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in quarrel, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>206</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>207</hi>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>218</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Writing, Babylonian and Assyrian, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>
</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
